

Published by the Institution of Engineering and Technology, London, United Kingdom
The Institution of Engineering and Technology is registered as a Charity in England   &   Wales (no. 211014) and
Scotland (no. 5C038698).
The Institution of Engineering and Technology is the institution formed by the joining
together of the IEE (The Institution of Electrical Engineers) and the IIE (The Institution
of Incorporated Engineers).
© 1992, 1995, 1997, 2002 The Institution of Electrical Engineers
© 2008, 2012, 2015, 2018 The Institution of Engineering and Technology
First published 1992 (0 85296 537 0)
Reprinted (with amendments   to   Section 17) 1993
Second edition (incorporating Amendment No. 1   to   BS 7671:1992) 1995 (0 85296 867 1)
Third edition (incorporating Amendment No. 2 to BS 7671:1992) 1997 (0 85296 956 2)
Fourth edition (incorporating Amendment No.   1   to BS 7671:2001) 2002 (0 85296 991 0)
Reprinted (with new cover) 2003
Reprinted (incorporating Amendment No. 2 to BS 7671:2001) 2004
Reprinted (with amendments   to   imprint page) 2006
Fifth edition (incorporating BS 767112008) 2008 (978-0-86341-857-0)
Reprinte   2009, 2010
Sixth edition (incorporating Amendment No. 1 to BS 767112008) 2012 (978-1-84919-275-0)
Seventh edition (incorporating Amendment nos. 2 and 3 to BS7671:2008+A3:2015)   2015   (978-1-84919-873-8)
Reprinted (with minor corrections) 2015
Eighth edition (incorporating BS 7671:2018) 2018 (978-1-78561-452-1)
d
y with the prior permission in writing of the publishers, or in the case
by the Copyright Licensing Agency.
hers at The Institution of
This publication is copyright under the Berne Convention and the Universal Copyright Convention. All rights
reserved. Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or private study, or criticism or review, as
permitted under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988, this publication may be reproduced, stored or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, onl
of reprographic reproduction in accordance with the terms of licences issued
Enquiries concerning reproduction outside those terms should be   sent   to   the publis
Engineering and Technology, Michael Faraday House, Six Hills Way, Stevenage, SGl QAY, United Kingdom.
Copies of this publication may be obtained from:
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
PO Box 96, Stevenage, SGT ZSD, UK
Tel: +44 (0)1438 767328
Email: sales@theiet.org
www.theiet.org/wiringbooks
While the author, publisher and contributors believe that the information and guidance given in this work are cor-
rect,   all parties   must   rely upon their own skill and judgment when making use of them.   The author, publisher and
contributors do   not   assume   any   liability   to   anyone for any loss or damage caused by any error or omission in the
work, whether such an error or omission is the result of negligence or any other cause. Where reference is made
to   legislation it is   not   to   be considered as legal advice. Any and all such liability is disclaimed.
Typeset in the UK by the Institution of Engineering and Technology, Stevenage
Printed in the UK by Sterling Press Ltd, Kettering
ISBN 978-1   -78561-452-1
ISBN 978-1   -78561-453-8
(paperback)
(electronic)

6
7
8
9
inapter   1
1.1
Gene   11
Safety
1.2   Required competence
1.3   The client
1.3.1   Certificates and Reports
1.3.2   Rented domestic and residential accommodation
1.4   Additions and alterations
1.5   Departures and non-compliance
1.6   ecord keeping R
11
12
13
13
13
13
14
14
17 Chapter   2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
17
18
19
20
20
20
21
33
40
40
40
41
41
2.6.2
2.6.3
2.6.4
2.6.5
2.6.6
2.6.7
2.6.8
2.6.9
2.6.10
2.6.11
2.6.12
53
54
55
56
Purpose of initial verification
Certificates
Required information
Frequency of subsequent inspections
Initial inspection
2.5.1   General procedure
2.5.2   Comments on individual items   to   be inspected
2.5.3   Inspection checklist
Initial testing
2.6.1   Test results
Electrical Installation Certificate
Model forms
The sequence of   tests
Continuity of protective conductors, including main and
supplementary bonding
Continuity of ring final circuit conductors
Insulation resistance
Confirming SELV or PELV circuits by insulation resistance
testing
Testing of electrically separated circuits
Testing of functional extra-low voltage (FELV) circuits
Protection by barriers or enclosures provided during erection
Proving and testing of non-conducting location
(insulation resistance/impedance of floors and walls)
Polarity testing
Earth electrode resistance testing
2.6.13
2.6.14
56
59
60
Guidance note 3: Inspection   s.   Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
41
45
49
3

65
65
68
73
74
76
76
77
77
Chapl   inspection and   ing   81
urpose of periodic
2
81
81
82
83
83
84
85
88
88
89
89
91
93
93
98
98
98
100
102
editio   105
Chapl   Test   instruments an: L   107
107
107
Chapter 5   Forms
109
109
110
113
113
114
114
119
119
120
2.6.15   Protection by automatic disconnection of supply
2.6.16   Earth fault loop impedance verification
2.6.17   Prospective fault current, l f
2.6.18   Phase sequence testing
2.6.19   Operation and functional testing of RCDs
2.6.20 Other functional testing
2.6.21   Verification of voltage drop
2.6.22 Verification in medical locations
2.6.23 Verification of protection of low voltage installations
against temporary overvoltages due   to   faults in the
high voltage or low voltage system
2.6.24   Verification of protection against overvoltages of
atmospheric origin or due   to   switching
2.6.25   Verification of measures against electromagnetic disturbances
3.1   P   inspection and testing
5.   Necessity for periodic inspection and testing
3.   Electricity   at   Work Regulations
3.4   Design
3.5   Routine checks
3.6   Required information
3.7   Frequency of periodic inspections
3.8   Requirements for periodic inspection and testing
3.8.1   Scope
3.8.2   Process   - prior   to   carrying out inspection and testing
3.8.3   General procedure
3.8.4   Setting inspection and testing samples
3.9   periodic   inspection
3.9.1   Example checklist of items that require inspection
3.10 Periodic testing
3.10.1   General
3.10.2   Tests   to   be made
3.10.3   Additional notes on periodic testing
5.11   Electrical Installation Condition Report
3.12   Periodic inspection of installations constructed   to   an earlier
n of BS 7671 or the IEE Wiring Regulations
4.1   Instrument standard
4.2   Instrument accuracy
4.3   Low-resistance ohmmeters
4.4   Insulation resistance testers
4.5   Earth fault loop impedance   testers
4.6   Earth electrode resistance testers
4.7   RCD testers
4.8   Phase rotation instruments
4.9   Thermographic equipment
5.1   Initial verification (inspection and testing) forms
5.2   Minor works
5.8   Periodic inspection and testing
5.4   Model forms for certification and reporting
120
121
4
Guidance   Note 3:   Inspection   s.   Testing
®   The Institution of Engineering and Technology
78
78

earth fault loop
139
ables
Appendix   3   of BS 7671
Methods of adjusting tabulated values of
T   139
143
144
Appendix   B   Resistance   copper   I   147
B1
B2
Standard overcurrent deuces
Steel-wire armour, steel conduit and steel trunking
149
150
Index   151
A1
A2
AS   25
Guidance note 3: Inspection   a.   Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
5

The   Institution of Engineering   and   Technology acknowledges the invaluable
contribution made by the following individuals and organisations in the
preparation of this Guidance   Note;
Institution of Engineering and Technology
Lovegrove lEns FIET
Eur In   G Kenyon BEng(Hon5) CEng   MIETTec;hlOSH
R Wickens   -   college lecturer
H.R.
We   would like to thank the following organisations for their
continued support:
British Cables Association
Certsure (trading as NICEIC and Elecsa)
City and Guilds
EAL
ECA
Electrical Contractors' Association of Scotland (SELECT)
Electrical Safety First
The CAMBICA Association Ltd
Health and Safety Executive
NAPIT
Stroma Certification
6
Guidance   note   3: Inspection & Testing
o The Institution of Engineering and Technology

References to British Standards, CENELEC Harmonization Documents and International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) standards are made with the kind permission of
BSI.   Complete copies can be obtained by   post   from:
BSI Customer Sen/ices
389   Chiswick High Road
London W4 4AL
Tel: +44 (0)20 8996 9001
Fax: +44 (0)20 8996 7001
Email: orders@bsigroup.(;om
The BSI also maintains stocks of international and foreign standards, with many English
translations. Up-to-date information on BSI standards can be obtained from the BSI
website: www.bsi-globalcom
Illustrations of test instruments were provided by Farquhar Design:
wvwv.farquhardesign.co.uk
Thermographic surveying images are reproduced with the kind permission of FLIR
Systems Ltd: www.flirthermography.co.uk
Cover design and illustration were created by The Page Design:
www.thepagedesign.(;o.uk
It   is strongly recommended that anyone involved in work on or near electrical
installations possesses a copy of the latest version the   Memorandum of guidance on
the Electricity   at   Work Regulations   1989 (HSR25) published by the Health and Safety
Executive.
Copies   Safety Executive documents and approved codes of practice
(ACOP) can be obtained from:
of Health and
HSE Books
PO Box 1999
Sudbury, Suffolk C010 2WA
Tel: +44 (0)1787 881185
Email: hsebooks@prolog.uk.com
HSE documents can be downloaded   at:   http://books.h5e.gov.uk
1
~;
Guidance note 3: Inspection   a.   Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology

This Guidance Note is part of a series issued by the Institution of Engineering and Technology
to   explain and enlarge upon the requirements in BS 767l:2018, the 18th Edition of the IET
Wiring Regulations.
From here on in BS   767112018   is referred   to   as BS 7671, and will only include a year after
the standard where there is a need   to   refer   to   a requirement made in an earlier edition, such
as BS 7671:2008.
Note that this Guidance Note does not ensure compliance with BS 7671. lt is intended
to   explain some of the requirements of   BS 7671   but   readers should always consult
BS 7671   to   satisfy themselves of compliance.
The scope generally follows that of BS 7671; the relevant Regulations and Appendices are
noted in the margin. Due   to   the introduction of CENELEC Harmonised Document (HD)
60364-6 in 2016 covering inspection and testing it has been necessary   to   align the clause
numbering in BS 7671 with the HD clause numbering and this has resulted in Chapters 61   to
63 no longer being used, and the text of Part 6 of BS 767112018   starts   at   Chapter 64. Apart
from RCD testing, the requirements for inspection and testing have not significantly changed.
All of the Guidance Notes also contain references   to   other relevant sources of information.
Electrical installations in the United Kingdom that comply with   BS   7671 are likely   to   satisfy
the relevant parts of Statutory Regulations such as the Electricity at Work Regulations 1989.
However, this   cannot   be guaranteed. It is stressed that it is essential   to   establish which
Statutory and other Regulations apply and   to   install accordingly. For example, an installation
in premises subject   to   licensing may have requirements different from or additional   to,   those
of BS 7671 and these will take precedence.
The Regulations (BS 7671) apply   to   the design, erection and verification of electrical
installations, also   to   additions and alterations to existing installations and   to   the inspection and
testing of existing installations. Existing installations that have been installed in accordance
with earlier editions of the Regulations may not comply with this edition in every respect, but
this does   not   necessarily mean that they are unsafe for continued use or require upgrading,
and the person or persons carrying out the inspection and testing of such an installation   must
decide as   to   whether the installation is safe and suitable for continued use.
Other related electrical installations such as emergency lighting, fire alarms and ICT systems
also have their own installation requirement standards such as BS 5266, BS   5639   and
BS 6701 that may have installation and inspection and testing and certification requirements
over and above that required in BS   7671.   It is essential that these further requirements are
complied with in such installations.
The inspector is reminded that for a periodic inspection and   test   of an existing installation
their duty is   to   assess the suitability of the existing installation for continued use, subject   to
any agreed exclusions. They must therefore make sufficient inspection and tests to enable
them   to   make that   assessment.   Also the duty of the buildings or site "duty holder"   to   maintain
their installation so it is safe and   to   undertake such maintenance so this can be achieved.
8
Guidance Note 3: Inspection & Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
.Q

This Guidance Note is concerned principally with Part 6 of BS 767   I
testing.
Inspection and
Neither BS 7671 nor any of the lET's Guidance Notes are design guides.   It   is essential to
prepare a design and specification prior   to   commencement   or alteration of an electrical
installation.
514.9   The documents should set   out   the design and provide sufficient information   to   enable
electrically skilled persons and electrically instructed persons (where appropriate)   to   carry
out   the installation and   to   commission it. The specification must include a description of how
the   system   is   to   operate and the design and operational   parameters.   It   must   provide for the
commissioning procedures that will be required and for the provision of adequate operation
and maintenance information   to   the user. This should be by means of an operational manual
or schedule, and 'as fitted' drawings if necessary.
It must be noted that it is a   matter   of   contract   as   to   which person or organisation is responsible
for, in   turn,   the design, specification, construction and verification of the installation and the
provision of any operational information.
The persons or organisations who might be concerned in the preparation of the specification
include:
The Designer (See the   CDM   Regulations 2015 for information on designers' duties)
The Installer (Contractor or contractors)
The Verifier
Specialist Commissioning Engineers
The Distributor of Electricity (DNO)
The Installation Owner and/or User
The Architect
The Fire Risk Assessor (a   competent   person for building inspection for fire risk and safety)
Specialist manufacturers or suppliers
Area Building Control bodies
Any Regulatory Authority
Any Licensing Authority
Any Specialist Insurers
The Health and Safety Executive
Guidance note 3: Inspection & Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
9

The revision of the CDM Regulations   2ors   has given guidance on the duties required
of a designer, as well as carrying   out   the actual design layout, calculations and
specifying the materials and installation requirements. "Designers are those, who as
part   of a business, prepare or modify designs for a building, product or   system   relating
to   construction work.
When preparing or modifying designs,   to   eliminate, reduce or control foreseeable risks
that may arise during:
1
2
construction, and
the maintenance and use of a building once it is built.
Provide information   to   other members of the project   team   to   help them fulfil their
duties."
133.1
Sect 511
Details of each item of equipment should be obtained from the manufacturer and/or
supplier and compliance with appropriate standards confirmed.
Health and safety of all installation and inspection and testing staff and any other
persons in the premises is vital and a work plan including risk   assessments   and
method statements   must   be agreed with all parties and put in place before any work
is undertaken.
The installation operational manual   must   include a description of how the system as
installed is   to   operate, maintenance provisions and all   test   and commissioning records.
The manual should also include manufacturers' technical data for all items of switchgear,
luminaires, accessories,   etc.   and any special instructions that may be needed. The
Health and Safety   of   Work etc. Act f974 Section 6 and the Construction (Design and
Management   Regulations   2015 are concerned with the provision of information,
and guidance on the preparation of technical manuals is given in BS   EN   a2079-I
Preparation of rhstructions for use. Structuring, content and presentation. General
pnhcipies and detailed requirements   and BS 4940 series   Technical information on
construction products and services.   The size and complexity of the installation will
dictate the nature and   extent   of the manual.
with regard   to   the inspection and testing of an existing installation, it is necessary   to
agree a detailed specification of the requirements of the client including any limitations.
10
Guidance note   3:   Inspection 2. Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

l.l   Safety
Before any work can begin a work programme should be agreed with the client and
a Health and Safety plan including risk   assessments   and method statements agreed
and put in place.   It   may be that work has   to   be carried   out   when the premises is
operating and start are present so they   must   not   be exposed   to   any safety risks, work
areas should be fenced off with   temporary   barriers and electrical equipment   not   left
unattended when open. Escape   routes   must   be kept open   at   all times or   temporary
alternatives arranged. Where supplies have   to   be isolated it is necessary that this   must
be planned in advance with the premises management.
Electrical inspection and testing inherently involves some degree of hazard. It is
therefore the inspector's duh/   to   ensure their own safety, and that of others, in the
performance of the   test   procedures. The testing safety procedures detailed in Health
and Safety Executive Guidance Note GS38 (fourth edition)   'Electrical test equipment
for use on iow voltage electrrcof systems'   should be observed. Where testing does   not
require the equipment or   part   of an installation   to   be live, it should be made dead and
safely isolated. Guidance on live and dead working can be found in the Health and
Safety Executive publication   Electricity   at   Work   Regulations   l989(HSR25). Guidance
on safe isolation procedures can be found in   Best Practice Guide   No.2   Guidance on
the management of electrical safety and safe isolation procedures for low voltage
iNstallations,   published by the Electrical Safety First.
When using test instruments, safety can be achieved by precautions such as:
(H)
(b)
understanding the equipment   to   be used, its rating and the characteristics of
the installation it is proposed   to   use the equipment upon,
checking that the instruments   to   be used conform   to   the appropriate British
Standard safety specifications. These are BS EN   61010   Safety requirements
for   electrical   equipment for   measurement   control. and   laboratory use   and
BS 5458:1977 (1993)   Specification for safety requirements for indicating and
recordiNg electrical measuring instruments and their accessories.   BS 5458 has
been withdrawn, but is the standard   to   which older instruments should have
been manufactured,
(C)
(J)
checking any test equipment before use   to   see that it is complete and not
damaged, and
checking that test leads including any probes or clips used are in good order,
are clean and have no cracked or broken insulation. Where appropriate, the
guidance given in GS 38 should be observed for   test   leads, which recommends
the use of fused   test   leads aimed primarily   at   reducing the risks associated with
arcing under fault conditions.
11
©
Guidance note   3:   Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology

Particular attention should be paid   to   the safety aspects associated with any   tests
performed with instruments capable of generating a test voltage greater than 50 V, or
which use the supply voltage for the purposes of the   test   in ear   oop testing
and residual   current   device (RCD) testing. Note the warnings giv   son   2.6.16
through to Section 2.6.19 of this Guidance Note.
to   fault
e 1-1   In   SEC
Electric shock hazer   an arise from, for example, capacitive loads such as when
cables become char   in the process of an insulation resistance   test,   or voltages on
the earthed metalwork whilst conducting a loop test or RCD test. The test limits quoted
in these guidelines are intended   to   minimise the chances of receiving an electric shock
during tests.
Q15   (_
geed
1.2   Required competence
641.6   Persons carrying   out   the inspection and testing of any electrical installation   must,   as
appropriate   to   their function, have a sound knowledge and experience relevant to
the nature of the installation being inspected and tested, and of BS 7671 and other
relevant technical standards. (Such persons are generally referred   to   in this Guidance
Note as 'the inspector' and this may be one or more persons depending on the work
being undertaken.)
Inspectors must also have relevant education and experience to enable them   to
perceive risks and avoid dangers that electricity can   create,   and be fully versed in the
inspection and testing procedures. This can best be shown by the inspector holding a
recognised inspection and testing qualification.
Furthermore, the inspector   must   employ suitable   test   equipment during the inspection
and testing process and have sufficient inspection experience in interpreting the results
with   respect   to   the requirements of BS 7671.
It   is worth noting that the person responsible for inspection and testing may be
required   to   formally demonstrate   competence   by means of registration/certification
under a recognised scheme or membership of a recognised trade body, or for example
as a condition of   contract   and/or as a requirement of the Local Area Building Control
(LABC).
It is the responsibility of the inspector, as appropriate for either the initial or periodic
inspection and testing,   to:
641.4
641.3
(a)
(b)
(C)
prevent danger to any person or livestock and property damage,
compare the   inspection   and   testing results   with   the   design   criteria   (where
available), with   BS   7671   and/or previous records, as appropriate,
confirm compliance or non-compliance with   BS   7671 that may give rise   to
danger, and
take a view and   report   on the condition of the installation. (d)
In   the   event   of a dangerous situation being found, the inspector should recommend
the immediate isolation of the defective item of equipment. The person ordering the
work should be informed, in writing, of this recommendation without delay.
12
Guidance note 3: Inspection and Testing
®   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

1.3   The client
1.3.1   Certificates and Reports
644.1
653.1
Following the initial verification of a new installation or changes   to   an existing installation,
an 'Electrical Installation Certified:ate', together with a 'Schedule(s) of inspections' and a
'Schedule(s) of   test   results', is required   to   be given   to   the person ordering the installation
work.
Likewise, following the periodic inspection and testing of an existing installation,
an Electrical Installation Condition Report, together with Schedule(s) of inspection
and S<:hedule(s) of   test   results, are required   to   be given   to   the person ordering the
inspection.
Sometimes the person ordering the work is   not   the user of the installation.   In   such
cases it is necessary for the user (for example, employer or householder)   to   have
a copy of the certificate (together with the records of inspections and test results).
It is recommended that those providing documentation   to   the person ordering the
work also recommend that a copy of the forms be passed   to   the user, including any
purchaser of a domestic property.
Copies of any certificates or reports along with their associated schedules should be
kept in the operating and maintenance documentation for the premises.
1.3.2   Rented domestic and residential accommodation
In England and Wales, the   Landlord and Tenant Act   1985,   Section   II   Repairing
obligations in short leases sub-section (l)(b) implies that a landlord 'shall keep in
repair and proper working order the installations in the dwelling-house for the supply
of water, gas and electricity'.
A similar requirement can be found in the Housing (Scotland) Act 2014, Chapter 4,
Section   13,   which   states   that the electrical installation   must   be in a reasonable   state
of repair in order   to   comply with the Act. The legislation goes on   to   state   that the
installation must be maintained.
The above Acts do   not   directly specify periodic inspection and testing of an electrical
installation. Periodic inspection and testing is a means of demonstrating compliance
with the Acts. There are new proposals being considered by the government   to   require
the electrical inspection and testing of rented properties but these are not yet enacted
into legislation in England and Wales but the inspection and testing of rented properties
is required in Scotland.
Any repairs   must   be carried   out   by an electrically skilled person or an electrically
competent person under their supervision. The landlord is responsible for confirming
the competency of any   contractors   carrying out such work.
There are requirements for houses of multiple occupancy (HMO) and these are
required   to   be inspected and tested   at   intervals not exceeding five years, by a skilled
person,   competent   in such work - see Chapter   3.
132.16
644.1
641.3
1.4   Additions and alterations
Every addition or alteration to an existing installation must comply with the current
edition of BS 7671 and must not impair the safety of the existing installation and the
13
I'-ll
Q
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology

relevant inspection and testing requirements of Chapter 64 also apply   to   additions
and alterations. This applies especially   to   the replacement of a distribution board
or consumer unit.   In   order   to   verify that the addition or alteration   to   an electrical
installation complies with BS   7671,   the relevant parts of an existing installation   must
be inspected and tested   to   confirm the safety of the addition or alteration, including
for example:
(H)
(b)
(¢)
(d)
(e)
circuit ratings,
circuit conductor sizes,
means of earthing,
protective conductor continuity, and
earth fault loop impedance.
Whilst there is no obligation   to   inspect and   test   any part of the existing installation
that does   not   affect and is not affected by the addition or alteration, any departures
or non-compliances observed are required   to   be noted in the 'Comments on existing
installation' section of an electrical installation certificates (single-signature or multiple-
signature) or minor electrical installation works certificates.
l.s   Departures and non-compliance
These terms are now frequently used in certificates and reports and are defined in
Part 2 of BS 7671.
Departure   -   deliberate decision not   to   comply fully with the requirement of BS T67   I
for which the designer   must   declare that the resultant degree of safety is not less than
that achievable by full compliance.
Nor:-compfiarzce   - a   non-conformity that may give rise   to   danger.
1.6   Record keeping
132.13   It
514.9   p
is a requirement that the appropriate documentation called for in Regulation 514.9,
art 6, and (where applicable) Part 7 is provided for every electrical installation.
Chapter 65
Appx 6 - guidance to
recipients
Records of all checks, inspections and   tests,   including test results, should be kept
throughout the working life of an electrical installation. This will enable deterioration   to
be identified, and could also be used as a   management   tool   to   ensure that maintenance
checks are being carried   out   and   to   assess their effectiveness.
For   non-domestic   installations,   Regulation   12   of   the   Construction   (Design   and
Management) Regulations   2015   requires a record known as 'the health and safety
file'   to   be prepared, reviewed, updated and revised from time   to   time   to   take   account
of the work and any changes that have occurred. This should contain any information
relating to the project which is likely   to   be needed during any subsequent construction
work   to   provide for tl   =alth and safety of persons. The CDM Regulations require that
the health and safer   is passed on   to   the client on completion of the construction
work.
m*   ILL
Y
file
The   CDM   Regulations also requires that once the construction work has been
completed the health and safety file remains available for inspection by any person
who might need it   to   comply with any relevant legal requirements. It also requires
that the file is revised and updated as often as may be appropriate   to   incorporate any
relevant new information.
14
Guidance   note   3: Inspection and Testing
e   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

Electrical installation certificates, minor electrical installations works certificates and
electrical installation condition   reports   (as appropriate)   would   constitute   relevant
information in relation   to   this requirement.
For domestic installations the NHBC (National House-Building Council)   guidance
recommends that all instructions for services be passed   to   the building owner.
In   both domestic and non-domestic cases
that imply or specify records.
there may also be insurance requirements
The Efectromognetic Compotibility Regulations   20?6 are statutory and require that the
client keep the information provided by the installer relating   to   compliance with EMC
criteria for the life of the installation.
15
f'
*I
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology

16
Guidance note 3: Inspection and Testing
o   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

2.1   Purpose of initial verification
Verification is defined in BS 7671 as: "All measures by means of which compliance
of the electrical installation with the relevant requirements of BS 7671 are checked,
comprising inspection, testing and certification."
641.1
642.2
643.1
Initial verification is carried   out   on a new installation be
't
is put into service. The
purpose is   to   confirm by way of inspection and testing, during construction and on
completion, that the installation complies with the design and construction   aspects   of
BS 7671, in so far as is reasonably practicable.
ore   I
Appx   6,
Intro   (v)
It is important   to   recognise the responsibilities of the signatories for the design,
construction and verification. While the inspector is responsible for verifying aspects of
both design and construction, they   cannot,   and are not meant to, absolve responsibility
for their work elements from the designer and installer.
'sample
sider one aspect of the design: the inspector should check that the cable size
5   specified, have been correctly selected and installed.   In   order   to   do this he or sl
auld need the design criteria, say a cable schedule, and would then   carly   out   a visu
spection of the installed cable sizes for comparison. The   most   logical position   to   c
)   would be   at   the distribution board housing the cables' protective devices.   It   won
unreasonable for him or her   to   carry   out   design cable sizing checks, as this is ti
sponsibility of the designer.
this point, it would also be unreasonable for the inspector   to   check that each cab
e   at   the distribution point is maintained throughout the cable's length (this is   to
sponsibility of the installer or constructor).
is example illustrates the principle and responsibilities that the designer   ar
instructor   of the installation are both confirming their facets and that the inspect
tries   out   checks but only in so far as   to   supplement the responsibilities of others
642.3
The inspector must have adequate information of the design details   to   check and
inspect against and BS   7671   provides a format list in Regulation 642.3 of items   to   be
verified, but this list is   not   exhaustive. These items are as follows:
(a)
Installed electrical equipment is of the   correct   type   and complies with an
applicable British or Harmionized Standard, or a foreign national standard based
on an IEC Standard.
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
11

(b)
(0)
(do
The fixed installation   is correctly   selected   and erected, taking into account
manufacturers' instructions.
The fixed installation is   not   visibly damaged or otherwise defective so as   to
impair safety.
The installation is ready and safe   to   be used.
Sect   642   Inspections
Inspections are an important element of inspection and testing, and are described in
Section 2.5 of this Guidance Note.
Sect 643
The tests are described in Section 2.6 of this Guidance Note.
Tests
644.1   Results
The results of inspection and tests are   to   be recorded as appropriate. The HSE's
guidance on   The Electricity   it   Work Regulations   1989 (HSR25) recommends records
of all maintenance including   test   results be kept throughout the working life of an
installation - see guidance on EWR Regulation 4(2) This can enable the condition of
equipment and the effectiveness of maintenance   to   be monitored.
643.1   Relevant criteria
The relevant criteria are, for the most part, the requirements of the Regulations for
the particular inspection or test and most criteria are given in Chapters 2 and   3   of this
Guidance Note.
There will be some instances where the designer has specified requirements which
are particular   to   the installation concerned. For example, the intended impedances
may be different from those in BS   7671.   In this case, the inspector should either ask
for the design criteria or forward the test results to the designer for verification with
the intended design.   In   the absence of such data the inspector should apply the
requirements set out in BS 7671.
Verification
The responsibility for comparing inspection and test results with relevant criteria,
as   required by Regulation   6-41.3,   lies with the   party   responsible for inspecting
and testing the installation. This party, which may be the person carrying   out   the
inspection and testing, should sign the 'Inspection and testing' section of the Electrical
Installation Certificate or the 'Declaration' section of the Minor Electrical installation
Works Certificate. If the person carrying out the inspection and testing has also been
responsible for the design and construction of the installation, he or she must also sign
the design and construction sections of the Electrical Installation Certificate, or make
use of the single- signature Electrical Installation Certificate.
2.2   Certificates
Appx   6   Appendix   6   of BS   7671   contains model forms for the initial certification of a new
installation or for an addition or alteration   to   an existing installation, as follows:
(a)
(b)
multiple-signature Electrical Installation Certificate
Minor Electrical Installation Works Certificate.
18
Guidance note   3:   Inspection and Testing
o The Institution of Engineering and Technology

Examples of typical forms are given in Chapter 5 of this Guidance Note.
Multiple-signature Electrical Installation Certificate
The   multiple-signature   certificate   allows   different   persons   to   sign   for   design,
construction, inspection and testing, and allows   two   signatories for design where there
is mutual responsibility. Where designers are responsible for identifiably separate   parts
of an installation, the use of separate forms would be appropriate.
Minor Electrical Installation Works Certificate
This certificate is   to   be used only for minor works that do   not   include the provision of
a new circuit, such as an additional socket-outlet or lighting point   to   an existing circuit.
The certificate may also be used for the replacement of equipment such as accessories
or Iuminaires, but not for the replacement of distribution boards, consumer units or
similar items.
2.3   Required information
6411   BS   7671   requires that the following information shall be made available   to   the person
or persons carrying   out   the inspection and testing:
rent   of general characteristics
311.1
312   .1   (b)
312.2   (C)
313   .1   (d)
(2)
(f)
(8)
Assess
(a)   the maximum demand, expressed in amps, kW or kVA (after diversity is taken
into account),
the number and   type   of live conductors of the source(s) of energy and of the
circuits used in the installation,
the type of   system   earthing used by the installation and any facilities provided
by the distributor for the user,
the nominal voltage(s) and its characteristics including harmonic distortion,
the   nature   of the   current   and supply frequency;
the prospective short-circuit   current   at   the origin of the installation;
the earth fault loop impedance (Ze) of that   part   of the   system   external   to   the
installation, and
the type and rating of the   overcurrent   protective device(s) acting at the origin
of the installation.
(h)
Note:   The   statutory   Electricity Supply, Quality and Continuity Regulations require that these
characteristics should be available from the DNO for all sources of supply from the
public supply network.
Diagrams, charts or tables
514.9.1   The Health and Safety at   Work etc. Act 1974 generally requires relevant information
to   be available as an aid   to   safe use, inspection, testing and maintenance. This may
include those items listed in Regulation   5149.1   as follows:
(a)
pints
410.12   (b)
the   type   and   composition   of   each   circuit, including p   of   utilisation,
number and size of conductors and   type   of wiring. This should include the
reference method shown in Appendix 4 Section 7 'Methods of installation' of
BS   7671
the method used for compliance with the requirements for basic and fault
protection   and,   where   appropriate,   the   conditions   required   for   automatic
disconnection
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
19

(c)
(d)
the information necessary for the identification of each device performing the
functions of protection, isolation and switching, and its location
any circuit or equipment vulnerable   to   the electrical tests specified in Part 6 of
BS 7671.
a   n
Frequency of subsequent inspections
Note:
13..2.2
The   term   'periodic inspection' implies the inclusion of any necessary   tests.
The time intervals between the recommended dates of periodic inspections need
consideration.
301.1
341.1
The period   to   the first periodic inspection and   test   is required   to   be considered and
recommended by the installation designer and other relevant parties as noted in
Regulations 301.1, and   341.1,   as   part   of the design.
The period   to   each subsequent periodic inspection should then be considered and
recommended as   part   of carrying   out   a periodic inspection and test, by the person
undertaking that particular inspection and test.
lt has never been clarified whether the proposed period   to   a subsequent periodic
inspection should be measured from the time of the previous inspection or from the
time when any identified repairs have been completed (they may never be). The
inspector   must   take a view on this and it would perhaps be best   to   set   it from the time
of the previous inspection, especially if there are significant repairs identified or if the
installation is poorly maintained.
652.1
facto
An inspector must also use their experience and skill   to   identify a suitable period
for a subsequent periodic inspection and they   must   be clear about their reasoning.
lndustny guidance is available but can only be general and each installation is different
and can have different   rs.   Too   frequent an inspection will cause unnecessary
costs,   but   too   long a period, especially if the installation is poorly maintained, may
allow significant possible dangers   to   develop, especial!   as an
Regulation   1   gives some guidance, but the in
and informed decision as they may need   to   justify
subject to local authority licensing are required to be inspected   at   set periods.
652.
installation gets older.
tor   must   make a reasonable
it. Some installations such as those
Y
spec
2.5   Initial inspection
2.5.1   General procedure
Inspection and, where required, testing should be carried out and the results recorded
on suitable schedules progressively throughout the different stages of erection and
before the installation is certified and put into   service.
641.1   It   should be noted that Regulation   641.1   requires inspection and testing   to   be carried
out   during the erection stage of the installation, and this is   to   allow the review and
inspediorr of work that may later be covered and inaccessible - but the inspector will
require necessary design information from the designer before any such inspections
during construction or installation.
A   model Schedule of Inspections is shown in Chapter 5 of this Guidance Note.
20
Guidance   note   3:   Inspection and Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

2.5.2   Comments on individual items to be inspected
642.3   BS   7671 provides a list of items considered as a minimum   to   be inspected but the list
is   not   exhaustive. The inspector where necessary will inspect and compare the items
against data provided by the designer and installer and identify any non-compliances
or departures but is   not   for the inspector   to   decide what installation items are required
or necessary, or identify any repairs or modifications. The list is as follows:
Sect   526   a   Connection of conductors
Every   connection between   conductors   and   equipment/other   conductors   should
provide durable electrical continuity and adequate mechanical strength.
It   is impractical for an inspector   to   physically inspect all connections but they should
inspect a representative sample of connection   types,   especially larger connections
such as on switch8ear and busbars. (It is noted that in some cases such as high   current
busbar connections specialist resistance test may be required that are outside the
scope of   BS   7671).
b   Identification   of cables and conductors
Sect   51a   It should be checked that each core or bare conductor is identified as necessary. The
single colour green   must not   be used. The bi-colour combination green-and-yellow is
only   to   be used for protective conductors and single-core green-and-yellow identified
conductors (other than PEN conductors)   must not   be over marked with another colour
or alphanumeric symbols   at   terminations.
Again it is impractical for an inspector   to   physically inspect all identifications, but they
should inspect a representative sample of types, especially on larger conductors such
as   to   switchgear.
522.8
c   Routing of cables
Cables and their cable management systems should be designed and installed taking
into   account   the mechanical   stresses   that users of the installation will make upon the
installation.
5225.201
522.6.203
A key requirement   to   note   is for cables installed in a wall or partition   at   a depth of less
than so mm from the surface. If the cable used does   not   incorporate an earthed
metallic covering, or, is   not   installed in an earthed conduit, trunking or duct, or, is   not
provided with mechanical protection sufficient   to   prevent damage being caused by
nails, screws or similar, or is   not   supplied via   sELv   or PELV, it will be necessary   to
provide additional protection by means of an RCD having a rated residual operating
current not exceeding 30 mA. This is a requirement even where cables are run within
the prescribed cable zones described in Regulation 522.6.202.
522.6.202
522.6.203
Another requirement relates   to   cables installed in a wall or partition, the construction
of which contains metallic component parts such as studs, frames or skins. Irrespective
of the depth   at   which the cables have been installed, they are required   to   be provided
with additional protection by an RCD having a rated residual operating   current   not
exceeding 30 mA, or be mechanically protected sufficiently to avoid damage to them
during construction of the wall or partition and during the installation of the cables, or
comply with the requirements referred   to   in the previous paragraph.
Cables should be routed in prescribed zones in walls (as shown below), as identified
in Regulation   522.5202   (especially in dwellings)   to   assist in avoiding damage by
penetration by nails and screws   etc.   It should be noted that the requirements can also
apply   to   the other side of the wall.
21
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology

Furthermore, where cables are installed   at   a depth of 50 mm or less from the surface
of the wall or partition, the requirements mentioned in the previous paragraph also
apply.
It   will be far   too   late   at   the end of the construction   to   view and   assess   any of these
things so it is vital that the inspector continually inspects the installation wor*k during
construction.
521.10.202   Cables   rout   d   uildings must be fixed such that they   cannot   come away from
their suppo   fires and collapse   to   block escape routes or entangle firefighters
searching the building in smoke filled conditions. Sadly such entanglements have led
to   fatalities in the   past   that could have been avoided with some forethought. Not all
escape   routes   in a building are defined and signed   - in open plan office areas there
can be several possible   routes   away from a desk or meeting room   across an   open
office area   to   an escape stair (see BS 9999) and all such routes should be kept clear
from possible entanglement. An escape   route   is defined in the Wiring Regulations as
being, "a path   to   follow for access   to   a safe area in the   event   of an emergency". The
requirement for surface run wiring systems   not   to be subject   to   premature   collapse in
the   event   of a fire applies   to   all areas   not   just designated escape   routes.
e
tia
in b
during
It   is   not   difficult   to   look   at   a proposed installation and consider the possibilities of
cables coming away from their f   have only plastic ties been used, is cable
tray   metal or plastic, is the tray upside down etc? If the cable supports are metal and
the cables lay in or are cleated   to   them with metal fixings then the cable   cannot   go
anywhere. Even if it is fixed with plastic ties or clips and could drop it may only require
an occasional metal or fire resistant fixing to restrain it.
ixirwgs
In   larger industrial or commercial installations cable ladder or   tray   and other services
may be suspended together from   concrete   structural elements by steel wires or "drop
rods" screwed into the concrete. The inspector cannot physically assess the suitability
or the loading of such fixings but may look   at   the design data provided   to   see that what
is installed was as the design.
Where cables run around or down walls - say   to   a   socket-outlet - and are contained in
small section plastic trunkirlg the cables should be fixed inside the trucking if it would
be possible for the trunking   to   deform in heat and the lid come off thus releasing the
cables.
22
Guidance   note   3: Inspection and Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

The inspector must also assess any fire protection repairs and fire stopping where
cables have been installed through a fire rated building structural element or wall.
132.7
Sect 52:5
d   Selection of conductors
The specification of cables used   - BS   type   and designation,   temperature   ratings,
selection for environmental conditions, conductor category and material, certification
to   and compliance with required   Construction Product Regulotrons   requirements etc.
must   be checked based on the data supplied by the designer and installer.
Sed   523
Sect 524
BS   8519   requires cables for both primary and secondary supplies   to   safety services   to
be fire resistant and   to   follow diverse routes through the building.
Sed 523
Sect 524
Sect 525
The cross-sectional area of conductors should be assessed against the   overcurrent
protective arrangement and the requirements for limitation of voltage drop, based
upon information provided by the installation designer (where available) such as a
cable schedule or schematic diagram.
Reference should be made, as appropriate,   to   Appendix   4   of BS 7671.
132.14.1
530.3.2
e   Verification of polarity - single-pole device in a TN or TT system
It   must be verified that single-pole devices for protection or switching are installed in
line conductors only, and that ES Iampholders are correctly connected.
f   Accessories and equipment
Correct connection (suitability, polarity, environmental, etc.) must be checked.
553.1.3   Table 55.1 of BS 7671   sets   out   the three different types of plug and socket-outlet
recognised, their ratings, and their associated British Standards.
553.2.2   Particular attention should be paid   to   the requirements for cable couplers   to   ensure
that the   connector   (female part) of the couplers is fitted   at   the end   remote   from the
supply.
559.5.1.204
559.5.1.205
Bayonet lamp folders B15 and B22 should comply with BS EN 61184 and have a
temperature rating T2, as described in that standard. ES lampholders should have the
live of the supply connected   to   their centre contact. Lighting circuits incorporating ai5,
B22, EIRE, E27 or E40 lampholders are only   to   be used in a lighting circuit rated up   to
16 A.
Sect   527   g   Selection and erection   to   minimize the spread of fire
Fire barriers, suitable seals and/or protection against thermal effects should be provided
if necessary   to   meet   the requirements of BS 7671. These are good examples of items
which can and should be inspected during the erection stage.
Each sealing arrangement built around services penetrations through a fire rated
building element should be labeled by the specialist installer   to   state its fire rating and
inspected   to   verify that it conforms   to   the manufacturer's erection instructions and
required rating.   It   is essential, therefore, that inspection should be carried   out   at   the
appropriate stage of the work, and that this is recorded   at   the time for incorporation in
the inspection and test documents.
A wiring system such as conduit, trunking or ducting that penetrates a building element
that has a specified fire rating is   to   be sealed both internally and externally   to   the
degree of fire resistance of the external element. Fire barrier requirements are detailed
in Regulations 5272.2 and 527.2.3.
Guidance Note   3:   Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
23

Protective measure   Protective provisions
Basic protection by
l
Fault protection by
Automatic disconnection
Of supply
l1,(
ul
Basic insulation of
parts   and/or bare
enclosures
Protective earthing, protective
equipotential bonding and
automatic disconnection   in
case of a fault
\ L   H   II lass   equipment
Double or reinforced
Insulation
Basic insulation   Supplementary Insulation
or Reinforced insulation
Electrical separation for
the supply of one item of
current-u51ng equupment
Basic Insulation of live
parts   and/or barriers or
enclosures
l
C
Simple separation from other
irCUiE and from Earth
Extra~low voltage provided
by   5ELV   or PELV
Limitation of voltage, protective separation and basic
insulation
Protective measure   Protective provisions
Basic protection by
l
Fault protection by
Obstacles   Obstade5   None
Placln   each ' J A I   mf   V
"L
I ( I [ 1 11 ~~T Mac Qh Placl
of
.   `1
None
Products classified as 'non-flame propagating' in accordance with BS EN t 1386-1 or
BS EN   50085   are liable   to   catch fire as a result of an applied flame, but in which the
flame does   not   propagate, and which extinguishes itself within a limited time after
the flame is removed. The test   to   classify products as 'non-flame propagating' is a
self-extinguishing   test,   it is   not   a fire resistance   test.   The product   cannot   be assumed
to   protect   the cable inside it from the effects of a fire. The cable should have its own
fire/smoke classification. Both metallic and non-metallic products can be classed as
'non-flame propagating
`}
Chapter   41   h   Measures of protection against electric shock
The following three tables list the   of
given in BS   7671.   The measures are discussed in more detail later
various measures   protection against electric shock
in   this section.
410.3.2   The tables divide up the measures into those that are generally permitted, those that
are for use only where access is restricted   to   skilled or instructed persons, and those
that are for use only where the installation is controlled or supervised by skilled or
instructed persons. The tables also list the provisions for basic protection and fault
protection that make up the protective measures.
Additional protection may also be specified as   part   of a protective measure under
certain conditions of external influence and in certain of the special installations or
locations. See later in this section.
v   Protective measures   generally permitted
4 1 ]
411
413
Sect 414
v   Protective   measures   Tor   use   only where access is controlled or supervised by skilled
persons
417.1
417..
24
Guidance note 3: Inspection and Testing
o The Institution of Engineering and Technology
J

Protective measure   Protective provisions
Basic protection by   Fault protection by
Non-conducting locations   Basir;   insulation of live
parts   and/or banners or
enclosures
No protective conductor,
Insulating floor and
walls, spacing/obstacles
between exposed-
conductive parts and
extraneous-r;onductive-
parts
OH I ng(2)
Earth-free local
equlpotential b
Basic insulation of live
parts   and/or banners or
enclosures
Protective bonding,
notices, etc.
law Electrical separation
the supply of more than
one item of current-uslng
went equip
Basic Insulation of live
parts and/or banners or
enclosures
Simple separation from
other circuits and Earth,
to   non earthed protective
bonding,   etc.
v   Protective measures   for use only where the installation is controlled or under the
supervision of skilled or instructed persons
418.1
418 .2
418.3
Notes:   (1) Not recognised for general application.
(2) To be used only in special circumstances.
41 6
(i)
Protective provision of basic protection by insulation of live
parts and/or barriers or enclosures
This protective provision forms   part   of a number of different protective measures, as
shown in the previous tables.
416.1
416.2
The inspection of this protective provision is   to   check that insulation has not been
damaged during installation and that barriers and enclosures have been selected and
installed   to   provide   at   least a degree of protection of IPXXB or lP2X and, for a horizontal
top surface that is readily accessible,   at   least IPXXD or lP4X, and are not damaged
(Insulation resistance is of course a fundamental   test   to   be carried out   - section 2.6).
Gi)
Protective measures generally permitted
Automatic disconnection of supply
411.2   The provision for basic protection in this protective measure is basic insulation of live
parts and/or barriers or enclosures, the inspection of which is discussed earlier in this
section.
411.3   The provision for fault protection is protective earthing, protective bonding and
automatic disconnection in case of a fault. Although a   significant main part of
verification is   measurement   of earth fault loop impedance for each circuit in order   to
confirm disconnection times, there are inspection   aspects   to   be dealt with for verifying
fault protection, as follows.
Presence of appropriate protective conductors:
542.3   (a)
Sect 543   (b)
earthing conductor
circuit protective conductors
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
25

Sect 544
Sect 544
(C)
(d)
(e)
protective bonding conductors
main   bonding   conductors.   Regulation   411.3.1.2   allows   that   metallic   pipes
entering the building having an insulating section   at   their point of   entry   need
not   be connected   to   the protective equipotential bonding but there is no
detail in BS   7671   as   to   what constitutes an "insulation section" or how this
is   to   be installed. The inspector can only inspect and confirm that what has
been specified by the installer is actually present. This should be noted on the
installation inspection schedule.
supplementary bonding conductors (where required).
312.2   The type of   system   earthing must be stated by the designer, for   example:
(G)
(b)
(c)
TN-C-S system (usually with protective multiple earthing (PME))
TN-S system
TT   system   (earth   le(;trode(s)   used   as   the   means   of   earthing   for   the
installation)
411.5 (TN)   The earth fault loop impedance must be appropriate for the protective device,
or   overcurrent   device and within the values given in the tables in Chapter 41.
i.e. RCD
411.5 (TT)
411.5 (TT)
Double or reinforced insulation
412.1.1   For double insulation, basic protection is provided by basic insulation, and fault
protection is provided by supplementary insulation.
For reinforced insulation, both basic protection and fault protection are provided by
a single application of reinforced insulation between live parts and accessible parts.
4   13.1.3   Where double or reinforced insulation is   to   be employed as the sole protective measure,
it is important   to   confirm that the installation or circuit so protected will remain under
effective supervision   to   prevent   any unauthorised change(s) being made that could
impair the effectiveness of the measure.
Electrical separation for the supply of one item of current-using equipment
413.1.1   Electrical separation is a protective measure where basic protection is provided by
basic insulation of live parts and/or by barriers and enclosures, in accordance with
Section 416, and fault protection is provided by simple separation of the separated
circuit from other circuits and from Earth.
Extra-low voltage provided by SELV or PELV
Sect 414   For SELV and PELV, requirements include:
414.1.1   (a)
3   (b)
414.
414.1.1   (c)
414.1.1   (d)
.1   (e) 414.1
the nominal voltage   must   not   exceed 50 V AC or 120 V DC;
an isolated source, for example, a safety isolating transformer   to   BS EN 61558-
2-6 or BS EN 61558-2-8,
protective separation from all non SELV or PELV circuits,
for SELV, basic: insulation between the SELV   system   and Earth, and
SELV exposed-conductive-parts   must   have no connection with earth, exposed-
conductive-parts or protective conductors of other systems.
26
Guidance   note   3: Inspection and Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

Gii)   Protective measures for use only where access is controlled or
supervised by skilled persons
Obstacles
411.2   Protection by obstacles provides basic protection only, not fault protection.   It   protects
against unintentional contact with live parts.
Where this measure is used, the area   must   be accessible only   to   skilled persons or   to
instructed persons under their supervision.
The measure is not   to   be used in some installations and locations of increased shock
risk. See Part 7 of BS 7671.
Placing   out   of reach
417.3   Placing out of reach also provides basic protection only. The distances referred   to   in
Regulations 4113.1 and 4113.2 should be increased where long or bulky conducting
objects are likely   to   be handled in the vicinity, taking   account   of the dimensions of
those objects.
410.3.5   Bare live parts are only permitted in areas where access is controlled or supervised
by skilled persons. The dimensions of passageways should be checked against the
information given in   pendix   3   of the HSE's guidance on   The Electricity   it   Work
Regulations   1989 (H   5) (see BS 7671 section 729).
As
SRI
Sect 729   Section 729   -   Operating and maintenance gangways covers situations where open
switchgear or busbars are permitted and where access is restri   d   to   skilled or
instructed persons. Inspection for verification in areas covered by Section 729 requires
careful checking, including the   measurement   of separation distances, for example
those associated with 'arm's reach', as per Figure 417 of BS 7671, these   must   be
confirmed with the installation isolated. However in   must   be noted that the Electricity
at   Work regulations take precedence in all cases and their requirements for accessible
live conductors   must   be followed in ALL cases.
its
(iV)   Protective measures for use only where the installation   is
controlled or under the supervision of skilled or instructed
persons
Nor:-conducting location
418.1.1   Where this protective measure is employed, such as in an electronic equipment   test
area, it must be verified (amongst other things) that all installed electrical equipment
meets   the requirements of Section 416 with regard   to   provisions for basic protection.
418.1.2   Further, the exposed-conductive-parts of the installation should be so arranged that
it is   not   possible for persons   to   make simultaneous contact with either two exposed-
conductive-parts, or an exposed-conductive-part and any extraneous-conductive-part
under normal operating conditions, if these parts are liable   to   be   at   different potentials
as a result of failure of the basic insulation of a live   part.
418.1.3   The inspector should confirm the achievement of this and check that within the location
there are no protective conductors (see also the specific test for this method in 2.6.12).
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedtnology
27

418.2   Earth-free loco/ equfpotendal bondfhg
The use of this protective measure is intended   to   prevent   the appearance of a
dangerous touch voltage under fault conditions.   In   some cases this protective measure
is combined with the protective measure of electrical separation.
4181.1   Where protection by earth-free local equipotential bonding is employed, it must be
verified (amongst other things) that all installed electrical equipment should meet the
requirements of Section 416 with regard   to   provisions for basic protection.
418.2.2   All simultaneously accessible exposed-conductive-parts and extraneous-conductive-
parts   should be interconnected by local protective bonding conductors.
418.2.3   Measures must be taken   to   ensure that the local protective bonding conductors are   not
connected to Earth either directly or unintentionally via the exposed- and extraneous-
conductive-parts to   h they are connected. whip
418.2.5   A warning notice complying with Regulation 514.13.2   must   be fixed in a prominent
position adjacent   to   every point of access   to   the location concerned.
The inspection, supplemented with   tests,   should verify that no item is earthed within
the area and that no earthed services or conductors enter or   traverse   the area, including
the floor and ceiling. Inspection should confirm whether or   not   this has been achieved.
Electrical sepcrrotzon for the supply   to   more than one item of current-using equipment
418.3
Sect 413
If it is intended   to   supply more than one item of current-using equipment using
electrical separation, it will be necessary   to meet   the requirements of Regulation 4188>.
Th'   in addition   to   meeting the requirements of Section 413, some of which are
refcncd   to   earlier in this section of this Guidance note in relation   to   the use of electrical
separation for the supply of one item of current-using equipment.
us is
418.13   The   separated circuit should be protected from damage and insulation failure.
418.3.4   Any exposed-conductive-parts of the separated circuit should be connected together by
insulated, non-earthed protective bonding conductors, which should   not   be connected
to the protective conductor or exposed-conductive-parts of any other circuit or to any
extraneous-conductive-parts.
418.3.5   Socket-outlets should have a protective conductor   contact,   which is connected   to   the
protective bonding   system   described above.
418.3.6   All flexible cables should contain a protective conductor for use as a protective bonding
conductor,   except   where such a cable supplies only items of equipment having double
or reinforced insulation.
418.31   If   two   faults affecting   two   exposed-conductive-parts occur and where conductors
of different polarity feed these, a protective device should disconnect the supply in
accordance with the disconnection time given in Table   41.1.
418_3_8   The product of the nominal voltage (volts) and length (meters) of the wiring   system
sh   not exceed l00,000 Vm and the length of the wiring system should not exceed
5(   1.
auld
)(_)   [T
28
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

(v)
Additional   protection
Additional protection by one or more RCDS
415.1.1   It   should be confirmed that an RCD selected   to   provide additional protection has a
rated residual operating current (IAn) not exceeding 50 mA and complies with relevant
standards.
Generally all socket-outlets up   to   and including 32 A rating should be provided with
additional protection by a   30   mA   RCD, but BS 7671 allows this   to   be omitted in non-
domestic installations where a written risk   assessment   shows that such additional
protection does   not   present a danger. lt is   not   for the inspector   to   consider or approve
the risk   assessment,   but the inspector should see the   assessment   to   prove that it
exists so the requirement of the regulation is fulfilled. The   assessment   should also be
attached   to   the Electrical Installation or Minor Electrical Installation Works Certificate
for future reference.
4   15.1.2   It should also be confirmed that appropriate protective measures in accordance with
Sections 411   to   414 are in place, as an RCD   must not   be used as the sole means of
protection against electric shock.
Additional protection by supplementary protective equipotent of bonding
415.2.1   Where supplementary bonding is provided it should encompass all simultaneously
accessible exposed-conductive-parts of fixed equipment, extraneous-conductive-parts
and the protective conductors of all equipment in the location where this protective
measure is being applied.
415.2.2   The effectiveness of supplementary equipotential bonding as provided may be verified
where the resistance between simultaneously accessible exposed-conductive-parts
and extraneous-conductive-parts fulfil the applicable one of the following condition.
•
•
for AC   systems,   R
for DC systems, R
50 V/I8
120 V/la
where la is the operating   current   of the protective device in amps, for   overcurrent
devices,   this is   the 5 second operating   current,   and for RCDs, IAn.
Sect   515   i   Prevention of mutual detrimental influence
Regulations   II   and   1   require electrical equipment   to   be so selected and
erected so that there will be no harmful influence (such as electromagnetic interference
or heat) between the electrical installation and other electrical and non-electrical
installations. The inspector is advised   to   give careful thought   to   this whilst carrying out
the inspection.
132.   .   l
E
__.>   ..
132.5.1   This however does   not   include the detrimental influence of other   systems   onto   the
electrical installation, such as   water   leaks or splashing, which are covered by the
requirements of Regulation 132.5.
Sect   537   j   isolating and switching devices
BS EN 60947-1 Low   Volta   gear   controlgeon General rules   defines standard
utilisation categories which allow for conditions of service use and the switching duty
to   be expected.
be so/(ch
r!
, i v 'ii' ..--|
|._,»   |   I   J
14
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
29

All switch utilisation categories   must   be appropriate for the   nature   of the load - see
Table 2.1. lt would be part of the design   to   specify the appropriate   type   of device.
GN2   on Guidance Note 2:   Isolation   &   Switching   provides more comprehensive guidance
is subject and should be consulted and its contents taken into   account. 1~l   1
v   Table 2.1   Examples of utilisation categories for alternating   current   installations
AC-22a   AC-22b   Switching   of   mixed   resistive
and   inductive   loads,   including
moderate overloads
wit
ighl
If   switchgear   to   BS EN 60947-1 is suitable for isolation it will be marked with the
symbol:
This may be endorsed with a symbol advising of function, for example, for a switch
disconnecter:
_ / _
Table 531.4   Guidance on the suitability or otherwise of protective, isolation and switching devices
to   be employed for one or more of the functions of isolation, emergency switching and
functional switching is given in Table 537.4 in BS 7671 and Guidance Note 2.
The inspector should carry out an isolation review   to   check that effective isolation
can be achieved, but it is   not   the inspector's responsibility   to   resolve any apparent
shortcomings or problems with the isolation and switching design. This review could
include, where appropriate, locking-off and inspection or testing   to   verify that the circuit
is dead and no other source of supply is   present.   It   should also be identified by the
designer where it may be necessary   to   isolate the neutral conductor.
Note (5) to Table   537.4   in BS 7671 points   out   that circuit-breakers and RCDs are not
intended for frequent load switching or functional switching unless they are approved
by the device manufacturer for this duty. The   note   gives further guidance relating   to
this and the inspector is   at   liberty   to   make a   comment   on   this use if it is inappropriate.
BS   7671   does   not   allow a switching or isolating device   to   be placed in the earth or
protective conductor other than a plug and socket-outlet.
30
Guidance note 3: Inspection and Testing
o   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

Sect   445
k   Presence of undervoltage protective devices
Suitable precautions should be in place where a reduction in voltage, or loss and
subsequent restoration of voltage, could cause danger. Normally such a requirement
concerns only   motor   circuits. If precautions are required they will have been specified
by the designer, however, the devices used   must   be confirmed as matching the
equipment specification and the relevant regulations in Section 445.
Chap   43   I   Protective and monitoring devices
Some protective devices have user or on-site configurable settings and the inspector
needs   to   confirm that the installer has correctly   set   up such protective devices.
421.1.7
Arc Fault Detection Devices (AFDDS) have been introduced in the 18th edition of
BS 7671 and they are designed   to   provide protection by monitoring the change of
current   flow in a final circuit due   to   a possible cable conductor fault that could cause an
arc and possible fire. Their use is recommended in BS 7671 but it is for the designer
to   decide on their use and the inspector   cannot   comment   if they are   not   installed.
Some makes of AFDDs have a   test   button (like an RCD) and this should be pressed
at   commissioning   to   prove operation, but if there is no   test   button an operational
commissioning test cannot be carried out.
Note:   BEAMA have published   free guide   to   AFDDs   that is available   to   download a
Sect 443   The guidance for the application of surge protection devices (SPDS) has been revised
and expanded in the   8th Edition of BS 7671, providing for protection against switching
surges and surges of atmospheric origin (lightning strikes). This is a complex area
which will be designed and usually installed by specialist suppliers. The inspector
can only review what is installed against the scheme documentation provided by the
specialist suppliers, and review their test and commissioning documentation.
Sect 514
514.8.1
514.9.1
m   Labelling of protective devices, switches and terminals
Each protective device   must   be arranged and identified so that the circuit protected
can be easily identified, and a diagram or chart indicating the function of each circuit
and size of conductors is required; the inspector should have this key document in
order   to   carry   out   much of his or her inspection and testing.
512.2
Sect   522
n   Selection of equipment and protective measures appropriate   to
external influences
Equipment   must   be selected with regard   to   its suitability for the environment   - ambient
temperature, heat,   water,   foreign bodies, corrosion, impact, vibration, flora, fauna,
radiation, building use and   structure.   A careful inspection is necessary   to   confirm the
suitability of each item of equipment.
132.12
Sect 513
o   Adequacy of access   to   switchgear and equipment
Every piece of equipment that requires operation or attention by a person   must   be
so installed that adequate and safe means of access (related   to   the amount of its
use) and sufficient working space are afforded, the inspector should check that these
requirements are   met.
Sect 514   p   Presence   of danger signs and other warning signs
Suitable warning signs, suitably located, are required   to   be installed   to   give warning   of:
514.10   Voltage
>   Where a nominal voltage exceeding 230 V   to   earth exists within an item of
equipment or enclosure and where the presence of such a voltage would   not
31
Guidance Note   3:   Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology

normally be expected. Voltages exceeding 230 V   to   earth require warning labels.
An example would be the use of a 690 V three-phase   AC   power transformer used
on   an   American air base located in the   UK.
514.11
Isolation
WI   live   parts   are   not   capable of being isolated by a single device. The location
of disconnecters should also be indicated   except   where there is no possibility of
confusion.
>   W?   I   Si
sn
Periodic inspection and testing
The wording of the notice is given >   egulation 514.12.11
RCDS
je   wording of the notice is given in Regulation 514.12.2. >   II
AFDDs
»»   Where AFDDs are installed, those provided with a trip   test   button (as RCDs) should
be tested every six months by pressing the button and a notice   to   this effect
should be provided. A   text   similar   to   the RCD notice can be used.
Earthing and bonding connections
514.13.1
s\4.13.1
514.13.2
r
P
The requirements for the label and its wording are given in Regulation   514.13.1.
The wording   of the notice required where protection by earth-free local equipotential
bonding (Regulation 418.25 refers) or by electrical separation for the supply   to
more than one item of equipment (Regulation 418.3 refers) is given in Regulation
514.13.2.
Non-standard colours
514_14_I   »   both For   installations   containing
colours) cable colours as well as cable colours   to   BS
(harmonized colours) an appropriate warning notice
the relevant distribution board. The wording of the notice
514.14.1.
pre-BS   767112001   (2004)   (pre-harmonized
1:2008 and later editions
must be present at or near
is given in Regulation
767
Alternative   supplies
514.15.'l   I*   For installations with alternative or additional voltage sources, a 'multiple-supplies'
warning notice is required   at   mains positions, points of isolation, distribution boards
and at any   remote   metering. The wording of the notice is given in Regulation
514.15.1.
514.16
H
»
1 _ _ l'-"»l
at   the r
igh protective conductor   current
5431.1 205   .   .if   circuits with a high protective conductor   current,   information   must   be provided
elevant distribution board indicating these circuits, as required by Regulation
543.7.1 .205.
5 I 4 _ 9 _ I   Presence of diagrams, instructions and similar information
The presence of diagrams, charts or tables, or an equivalent form of information
for the work being inspected should be verified. The form of information should
be legible and durable, and should indicate all of the following:
1»
ca)
(b)
The type and composition of   each circuit (which includes the points of
utilisation served, number and size of conductors, and the type of wiring).
The   method   used   for   compliance   with   Regulation   4103.2   (that   is,   the
protective measures used for basic and fault protection).
32
Guidance note 3: Inspection and Testing
e   The Institution of Engineering and Technology
171   R

(c) The information necessary for the identification of each device performing
the functions of protection, isolation and switching, and its location.
(d)Ar\y circuit or equipment that is vulnerable   to   the electrical   tests   as required
by Part 6.
For a simple installation, such as a dwelling or similar, the forgoing information can
be given in the form of schedule, so an additional copy of the Schedule of circuit
details' provided within or adjacent   to   each distribution board is likely   to   meet   this
requirement.
A complex installation would obviously require more comprehensive information
in the form of record or "as built" drawings and operation and maintenance
documents.
q   Erection methods
Chapter   52 contains detailed requirements on selection and erection. Fixings of
switchgear, cables, conduit, fittings,   etc.   must be adequate for the environment and a
detailed visual inspection is required during the erection stages as well as   at   completion.
521.10.201   Regulation 521.10.201 requires that cables are   to   be supported so they will   not   collapse
and come away from their fixings in the   event   of a fire and impede the escape of
persons from buildings. This can usually be achieved by installing a metal cable fixing
at   reasonable intervals.
2.5.3   Inspection checklist
Listed below are requirements   to   be checked when carrying   out   an installation
inspection. The list is   not   exhaustive. The inspector can only check against the design
and installation data provided by the designer and installer and   report   any non-
compliances noted, but   cannot   make any requirements.
Genera I
(a)
(b)
(-:)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(2)
(h)
(i)
(i)
(k)
(l)
(M)
(lt)
Equipment complies with a product standard or equivalent (511.1)
Equipment is installed using good workmanship (134.1.1)
Equipment is accessible for operation, inspection and maintenance (513.1)
Equipment is suitable for local atmosphere and ambient temperature (5122).
For   installations   in   potentially   explosive   atmospheres,   the   requirements   of
BS   7671   are supplemented by the requirements or recommendations of other
British or Harmonized Standards or by those of the person ordering the work
(110.1.3)
Final circuits are separate, including the neutral conductors (314.4)
Protective devices identified   to   indicate the circuits they protect (514.6.1)
Protective devices adequate for intended purpose, including AFDDs and SPDs
where installed (Ch. 53)
Disconnection times for protection against electric shock likely to be met by
installed protective devices (Ch. 41)
All circuits identified (514.1, 514.8, 5149)
Main switch provided (462.1.201)
Supplies   to   any safety services correctly installed, for example, fire alarms   to   BS
5839 and emergency lighting   to   BS 5266 (Ch. 56). This does   not   include any
inspection of the safety systems which should be inspected and maintained by
specialists.
Auxiliary circuits are installed (557)
Means of isolation labelled (51-4.1, 537.2.7)
Provision for disconnecting the neutral (Ch 46, 537.2.6)
Guidance   Note   3:   Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
33

p)   .3.3,   .5,
q)
(X)
(y)
(1)
(as)
(ab)
(ac)
(ad)
(be)
(af
(0) Main switches   to   single-phase installations, intended for use by an ordinary
person,   for   example,   domestic,   shop,   otlice   premises,   to   be   double-pole
(462.l.201)
(   RCDs provided where required (411   411.4,   411   4151, 4 2 2 9 ,   522.6.201,
522.6.202,   5321,   70r.4r 1.3.3,   70253,   702.55.1,   702.55.4,   703.4ri.3.3,
704.4l0.3.10,   704.411.3.2.1, 705.411.1, 705.422.7, 706.4I0.3.10.   708.553.1.13,
708.553.1.14,   709.531.2,   7l0.411.3,   710.531.3.2,   711.410.3.4,   711.411.3.3,
712.411.3.2.1.2, 714.411.3.3, 717.411.1, 717,411.6.2, 7i7.4i3, 717.415.1, 721.415.1,
722.531.2.101, 740.410.3, 740.415.1, 753.411.3.2, 753.415.l)
(   Selectivity between RCDs considered   to   avoid danger (3l4.l, 314.2, 53l.3)
(r)   Main   earthing terminal   provided   (542.4.t), readily   accessible   and   identified
where separate from switchgear (5t4.13.1)
(s) Provision for disconnecting earthing conductor (542.4.2)
(t)   Cables used comply with British or Harmonized Standards and Construction
Products Regulations (Appendix   4   of BS 7671)
(u) Earth tail pots installed where required on mineral insulated cables (543.2.7)
(v) Non-conductive finishes on enclosures removed where necessary   to   ensure
good   electrical   connection   and,   if   necessary,   made   good   after   connecting
(5261)
(w) Adequately rated distribution boards (to the relevant parts of BS   EN   60439 or
BS EN 61439 (may require derating, see CN 6)
Correct fuses or circuit-breakers installed (Sect   sci,   Sect 533)
All connections secure (1341)
Protection provided against voltage disturbances, including overvoltages, where
required (Ch. 44)
Measures taken against electromagnetic disturbances where required (Ch. 44)
Overcurrent protection provided where applicable (Ch. 43)
Suitable proximity (separation or segregation) of circuits (528)
Label notice for first periodic inspection and test provided (514.12.1)
Sealing of the wiring   system,   including fire barriers (5272)
) Cables and wiring   systems   installed and supported such that they will   not   be
liable to premature collapse in the   event   of a fire (52H0.202)
Suitable   degree of   protection   ('IP Code')   appropriate   to   external influences
when   installed   in   accordance   with   manufacturer's   instructions   (522.3.l,
sss.3.i).
(as)
(b)
(C)
Switchgear
(a) Meets requirements of BS EN 61008, BS EN 61009, BS EN 60947-2, BS EN
60898,   relevant   parts   of   or   BS   EN   61439   where   applicable,   or   equivalent
standards (Sect 511)
Securely fixed (13411) and suitably labelled (514.1)
Switchgear   assemblies,   including   consumer   units,   are   complete   with,   or
additionally housed in, fire protecting enclosures (421.1.201).
(d) Non-conductive   finishes   on   switchgear   removed   at   protective   conductor
connections and if necessary made good after connecting (5261)
(e) Suitable cable glands and gland plates used (5261)
(f)   Correctly earthed (Ch. 54)
(g) Environmental conditions likely   to   be encountered taken   account   of, i.e. suitable
for the foreseen environment (512.2)
Suitable as means of isolation as design, where applicable (Ch 46, 5372)
Need   for   isolation,   mechanical   maintenance,   emergency   and   functional
switching   met   where required by design (Ch 46, 537)
(j)   Firefighter's switch provided where required and labelled for identification and
operation (537.4)
(h)
(i)
34
Guidance Note   3:   Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology @

(k)
(|)
(M)
(fl)
All connections secure (526)
Cables correctly terminated and identified (514, 526)
No   sharp edges on cable entries, screw heads,   etc.,   which could cause damage
to   cables (l34.l.l, 522.8.H)
Adequate access, lighting and working space 032.12 and 5l3.l).
(e)
(f)
(3)
General wiring accessories
(a) Complies   with   appropriate   standards,   for   example,   BS   5733   (general
accessories) or BS EN 60670-22 (junction boxes) (5ll.l)
(b) Box or other enclosure securely fixed (t34.i.i)
(c) Metal box or other enclosure earthed where required (Ch. 54)
(d)   No   sharp edges on cable entries, screw heads,   etc.   which could cause damage
to cables (i34.i.i1522.8.ll)
Non-sheathed cables, and cores of cable from which sheath has been removed
not   exposed outside the enclosure (526.8)
Conductors correctly identified 55i4.3)
Bare protective conductors having a cross-sectional area of 6 mm? or less   to   be
sleeved green-and-yellow (514.-4.2, s43.3.201)
(h) Terminals tight and containing all strands of the conductors (526)
(i)   Cable grip correctly used or clips fitted   to   cables   to   prevent   strain on the
terminals (522.8.5, 526.6)
(j)   Adequate current rating (51 2.12).
Note:   Reference should also be made   to   the recommendations contained in Approved
Document M (England and Wales) and the Scottish Building Standards with regard   to
the heights   at   which socket-outlets, switches and other controls should be installed
in order   to   afford compliance with Building Regulations. See also the IET publication
ElectricianS Guide   to   the Building Regulations.
3)
(h)
(i)
(i)
Lighting controls
(a) Light switches comply with BS 3676 or BS EN 60669-1 (5lI.1)
(b) Selected for external influences (5l2.2)
(c) Single-pole switches connected in line conductors only (132.l4.1)
(d) Correct colour coding or marking of conductors (514
(e) Earthing of exposed metalwork, for example, metal switch plate (Ch. 54)
(f)   Adequate   current   rating allowing for any capacitive or inductive effects as given
in the design cable ratings (5l2.l.2)
(g) Device that simultaneously disconnects all live conductors is provided where a
group of luminaires is divided between three line conductors of a circuit with
only one common neutral (559.5.5)
Switch labelled   to   indicate purpose, where this is   not   obvious (5l4.1.l)
Appropriate controls suitable for the luminaires (559.5.1.206)
Standard   wall   accessory/switches   installed   beyond   zone   in   location
containing a bath or shower (70l.512.3)
2   a
Lighting points
(a) Lights connected via a recognised accessory (559   1), batten lampholders or
pendent   sets   being in compliance with BS EN 60596
(b) Ceiling rose complies with BS 67 (559.5.1)
(c) Luminaire supporting couplers comply with BS 6972 or BS 7001 (559.5.1)
(d)   Installation couplers comply with BS EN 61535 (559.5.1)
(e) Recognised connecting device used for luminaires that do   not   provide a device
for connection of the supply (559.5.4)
Track systems comply with BS EN 60570 (559.3.4 and 7l5.52l.l)
(f)
.5.
Guidance Note   3:   Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
35

(8)
(h)
(i)
(i)
(k)
(|)
(m)
(II)
Systems for ELV lighting comply with BS EN   60598-2-23   (7l5.52l.l)
Bare conductors of ELV lighting installations comply with all requirements of
Regulation 715.52l.l06 (7r5.521]r)
Not more than one flex unless designed for multiple pendants (559.5.1.202)
Flex support devices used and suitable for the mass suspended (559.5.2)
Switch-lines identified   (si4.3.2   and Appendix   7   of   BS   7671). For   two-core
switch wires, blue conductors are over marked with brown or L   at   terminations,
for three-, four- or five-core cables, all non-brown line conductors of switch and
intermediate strappers are over marked   at   terminations with brown or L
Penetrations in fire-rated ceiling made good (527.2.1)
Ceiling roses and similar   not   used for circuits having supply exceeding 250 v
(ss9.s.i.2or).
Protection from UV radiation (if any) is provided   to   external wiring within or
passing through a luminaire (559.5.6).
(a
(C)
Scottish
(J)
(e>
Socket-outlets
) Comply with BS 546, BS 1363-2 or BS EN 60309-2 (553.1.3) and shuttered for
household and similar installations (553.l.20l)
(b) Where   used   for   electric   vehicle   charging,   socket-outlets   complying   with
BS   1363-2   are of a type approved by the socket-outlet manufacturer for such
use (722.55.lOl .0.20I.l)
Mounting height above the floor or working surface suitable (553.1.6) (Also
complies   with   Building   Regulations   Part   M   and   equivalent   where
relevant   - see   note   on previous page.)
Correct polarity (6436)
If in a location containing a bath or shower, installed   at   least   3   m horizontally
from the bath or shower unless shaver supply unit or SELV (70l.512.3)
(f)   Suitably protected against the expected external influences where mounted in a
floor (5122)
Not used to supply a   water   heater having uninsulated elements (543.3.1)
Where metal conduit (including the accessory box) or earthed cable sheath
or similar used as a protective conductor, presence of an earth tail between
accessory box and socket-outlet terminal (543.2.7)
(i)   Additional requirement provided by 30 mA RCD or risk   assessment   provided for
specific non-domestic socket-outlets (4ll.3.3)
(j)   Socket-outlets with integral USB socket provision comply with BS 1363-2:2016.
(8)
(h)
Junction boxes, joint box and terminations
All cable joints and terminations installed so that they are accessible for future
inspection (except soldered, encapsulated, etc. joints or marked maintenance-
free accessory, see 526.3)
(b) Enclosures of terminals provide suitable protection against mechanical damage
(a)
(526.7).
Fused connection unit
(a) Correct rating and fuse
(b) Complies with BS 1363-4   Table
(5331)
(
53714, 559.5.1   Vin.
Cooker control unit
(a) Sited   to   one side and low enough for accessibility and   to   prevent   flexes trailing
across radiant plates (522.2.1)
Cable   to   cooker fixed   to   prevent strain on connections (522.8.5). (b)
36
Guidance note   3:   Inspection and Testing
o   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

(b)
(€)
Conduit systems
General
(a) Securely fixed, box lids in place and adequately protected against mechanical
damage ($22.8)
Draw points are accessible (522.8.6)
Recommended   quantity   of   cables   for   easy   draw   not   exceeded   during
installation,   to   avoid   causing   insulation   damage,   adequate   boxes   suitably
spaced. Item should be inspected during the erection stage as the care and
workmanship of the installer can be verified (s22.a.1 and   see On-Site Guide
Appendix E)
Solid elbows and tees used only as appropriate (522.8.1)
Unused entries blanked off where necessary (416.2 and 522)
Conduit system components comply with a relevant British Standard depending
on performance requirements (5ll.l)
Provided with drainage holes and gaskets as necessary (522.3.2)
Radius of bends such that cables are not damaged (522.8.3).
(8)
(h)
Rigid
(H)
(b)
cc)
metal conduit
Complies =.-with Et   in   61386-21 (521.8)
Connected   to   the main earthing terminal (41i.42, 4Il.5.I)
Line, neutral and any additional protective conductors are contained in the
same conduit (521.5.1)
Conduit suitable for wet, damp or corrosive situations (5223, 5225)
Fixed appropriately (522.8 and see Guidance Note   1   Appendix G)
Unpainted ends and scratches, etc. protected by painting (134.i.1, 522.5)
Ends of conduit reamed and bushed where relevant (134.1.1, 522.8).
(4)
(e)
(f)
(s)
'"_1
L_-I   » . _
Rigid non-metallic conduit
(a)
(b)
(C)
(d)
Complies with BS 4602,   N 60423 or the BS EN 61386 series (521.6)
Ambient and working temperatures within permitted limits (5221,
Provision made   to   allow for expansion and contraction (522.l5.l)
Boxes   and   fixings   suitable   for   mass   of   luminaire   suspended   at   expected
temperature   (559.5.2).
5222)
to)
Conduit   to   bo 'in   flame propagating' type (52I.6).
Flexible metal conduit
(a)
(b)
(C)
(d)
Compli   S EN 61386 series (52l.6)
Separate t   _,give   conductor provided (543.2.2'))
Adequately supported and terminated (522.8)
Line, neutral and   any additional protective conductors are contained in   the
same conduit (521.5.1).
~;~
wit lm B
)r   UU
"1   .,
's
Trunking
General
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(s)
Complies with BS 4678 or BS EN 50085-1 (521.6)
Securely fixed and adequately protected against mechanical damage (522.8)
Selected, erected and routed to avoid ingress of water (522.3)
Proximity   to   non-electrical   services, i.e. sources of   heat, smoke etc.   cannot
cause damage (528.?>)
Internal fire sealing provided where necessary (requires inspection during the
erection stage) (527.2.2)
Holes surrounding trunking made good (527.2.1)
Band   I   circuits partitioned from Band II circuits or insulated for the highest
voltage present (528.l)
37
»;
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedtnology

(h)
(i)
Circuits partitioned from Band I circuits or wired in mineral insulated metal-
sheathed cables (528.1)
Cables supported for vertical runs (522.8.5).
Lily(
II
l1(=L~IU(j]   all
5215.
I   do
(b)
to)
(d )
Metal trunking
(a)   id   any additional protective conductors are contained in the
same trunking (   1)
Protected again   mp or corrosion (5223, 5225)
Earthed (411.4.2, 411
Joints mechanically sound and of adequate continuity (543.2.5).
55.1)
522.2)
Rigid
ca)
(b)
(c) Trunkin
ld) Cables
to
non-metallic   trunking
Ambient and working temperatures within permitted limits (5221,
Provision made   to   allow for expansion and contraction (522.15.I)
be 'non-flame propagating'   type   (521,613)
e secured where necessary   to   prevent premature collapse in the
event   (521 .10.202)
g
to
of   £3
b
fin?
(b)
(c)
Busbar trunking and powertrack systems
(a) Busbar trunking system complies with BS EN 60439-2   or BS EN 61439-6 or
other   appropriate standard; powertrack system complies with   BS   EN 61534
series or other appropriate standard (52\.4)
Securely fixed and adequately protected against mechanical damage (522.8)
Joints mechanically sound and of adequate continuity (543.2.5).
Insulated cables
Non-flexible cables
to)
(b)
(cl
(d)
(e)
(f)
not
(ii)
(8)
aving
5226603 (522.6.202)
(h)
(i)
(i)
(k)
Correct   type   and   complies   with   relevant   design   Construction   Products
Regulations requirements (521)
Correct   current   rating (523 and Appendix 4)
Protected against mechanical damage and abrasion (522.8)
Suitable for high or low ambient   temperature   as necessary (5221)
Non-sheathed cables are protected by enclosure in conduit, duct or trunking
(except for protective conductors of   4   mm   and larger) (52i.10 and 543.l)
Sheathed cables concealed in   a   wall   at   a depth of less than 50 mm from the
surface and   forming   part   of a SELV or PELV circuit are:
(i)   routed in prescribed zones and additional protection is provided by an RCD
having a rated residual operating current, 1An,   not   exceeding 30 mA, or
provided with mechanical protection complying with (522.6.204)
Cables concealed in a partition containing metallic structural parts are
(i)   provided with additional protection by RCD h   'An not exceeding   30
mA, or
(ii)   provided with adequate mechanical protection   to   suit both the installation
of the cable and its normal use, or
(iii)comply   with the requirements   set   out in Regulation
Cables exposed to direct sunlight are of a suitable type or are suitably shielded
(522.rr)
Not   run in lift or hoist shaft unless   part   of the lift   installation and of the
permitted type (528.3.5)
Cables   buried in   the   ground   are   correctly   selected   and installed   for   use
(s22.8.ro)
Cables   installed overhead are correctly   selected and installed for such use
(522.8.4)
38
Guidance   Note   3: Inspection and Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology
11

(I)
(M)
(II)
(0)
(p)
(q)
(F)
(s)
w
(u)
Internal radii of every bend in a wiring   system   should be such so that it is
not   so tight that the cable and/or its conductors do   not   suffer damage and
terminations   are not   in   any   way   stressed   (522.8.3   and Guidance   Note   1
Appendix C)
Correctly   supported   and   secured   where   necessary   to   prevent   premature
collapse in the event of a fire (521.10.202, 522.8.4, 52:2.8.5)
Not exposed to   water,   etc.   unless suitable for such exposure (5225)
Metal sheaths and armour earthed (4Il.3.l.l)
Conductors identified at terminations (5l-4.3)
Joints   and   connections   electrically   and   mechanically   sound   and   adequately
insulated (526.l, 5262)
All wires securely contained in terminals, etc. without strain (522.8.5, 526)
Enclosure of terminals (526)
Glands correctly selected and fitted with shrouds and supplementary earth tags
as necessary (526.l)
Joints and connections mechanically sound and accessible for inspection, testing
and maintenance purposes, except as permitted otherwise (526.l, 526.3).
Flexible cables (52I.9)
(a)
(b)
(¢)
(d )
(e)
(f)
(8)
(h)
and
(i)
(i)
(k)
(|)
to)
Correct   type   and   complies   with   relevant   design   Construction   Products
Regulations requirements (52l.9.l)
Correct current rating (523 and Appendix 4)
Protected where exposed   to   mechanical damage (5216, 5228)
Suitably sheathed where exposed to contact with   water   (5223)   or corrosive
substances (522.5)
Protected where used for final connections   to   fixed   apparatus,   etc. (526.8)
Selected for resistance   to   damage by external heat sources (522.2)
Segregation of Band I and B   II circuits (528, see also BS 6701 and BS EN
50174 series)
Fire alarm and emergency lighting circuits segregated (528, see also BS 5839,
BS 5266)
Cores correctly identified (5l4.3)
Connections   to   have durable electrical continuity, adequate mechanical strength
and be made using appropriate means (526.l, 5262)
Where used as fixed wiring, relevant requirements met and secured where
necessary   to   prevent   premature   collapse   in   the   event   of   a   fire   (52I.9.l,
52l.l0.202)
Final connections   to   current-using equipment properly secured and arranged   to
prevent strain on connections (526.6)
Mass supported by cable so as   not   to   impair safety of the installation (559.5.2).
Protective conductors
(a)
(b)
(¢)
(d )
(2)
(f)
(8)
Cables incorporating protective conductors comply with the relevant British or
Harmonised Standard (511.l)
Joints   in   metal   conduit,   ducting   or   trunking   comply   with   Regulations   for
preservation of continuity (543.3)
Flexible or pliable conduit is supplemented by a protective conductor (543.2.3)
Minimum cross-sectional area of copper conductors (543.I)
Copper conductors of   6   mm? or less protected by insulation (543.3.201)
Circuit protective conductor   at   termination of   sheathed cables protected by
sleeving (543.3.201)
Bare circuit protective   conductor   protected   against   mechanical   damage and
corrosion (543.3.1)
39
.g
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology

(lt)
(k)
(|)
Insulation, sleeving and terminations identified by the bi-colour   combination
green-and-yellow (514.4.2)
Joints electrically and mechanically sound (526.l)
Separate circuit protective conductors of not less than   4   mm? if not protected
against mechanical damage and is   not   an integral   part   of a cable, not formed by
conduit, ducting or trunking, nor contained in an enclosure formed by a wiring
system (543.l.l)
Main and supplementary protective bonding conductors of   correct   size (544).
Cables   to   be secured where necessary   to   prevent   premature   collapse in the
event   of a fire (52l.10.202)
Enclosures
General
(a)
Suitable   degree   of   protection   ('IP   Code'
external   influences   when   installed   taking
instructions (416.2, 512.2, 522, Part 7).
in   BS   EN   60529)   appropriate   to
account   of   the   manufacturer's
2.6   Initial testing
643.1   The   test   methods described in this section are recommended   to   be used forveriiication.
This does not rule   out   the use of other test methods provided they give valid results.
2.6.1   Test results
The test results must be recorded on the Schedule(s) of Test Results and compared
with relevant criteria. For example, in order   to   verify disconnection times, the relevant
criteria would be design earth fault loop impedance values provided by the designer.
A model Schedule of Test Results is shown in Chapter 5.
2.6.2   Electrical Installation Certificate
644.1   Regulation 644.1 of BS 7671 requires that, upon completion of the verification of   a
new,   modified or extended installation, an Electrical Installation Certificate based on
the model given in Appendix   6   of BS   7671   is provided   to   the person that ordered the
work. Chapter 64 requires that:
644.3   (a)
644.3   (b)
644.5   (c)
644.1 .1   (d)
the Electrical Installation Certificate be accompanied by schedules of inspection
and schedules of   test   results. These schedules shall be based on the models
given in Appendix   6   of BS   7671
the schedule of test results shall include   test   results for every distribution and
final circuit
the Electrical Installation Certificate is signed or otherwise authenticated by a
skilled person responsible for each facet of design, construction and inspection
and test and   competent   to   verify that the requirements of   BS   7671 have been
met.
any defects or omissions revealed by the inspector are required to be made
good by the installer, and as necessary inspected and tested again, before
the Electrical Installation Certificate is issued; it is not the responsibility of the
person or organisation carrying   out   the inspection and testing   to   make good
defects or omissions.
Where the installation work does   not   extend   to   the installation of a new circuit   a
Minor Electrical Installation Works Certificate may be used instead of the full Electrical
Installation Certificate. This simplifies the documentation for small works and also the
40
Guidance note   3:   Inspection and Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

required installation inspection and testing and   tests   are limited   to   the circuit being
extended or modified, as detailed in Part 4 of the Certificate. See Chapter   5   for further
details and guidance on the completion of this Certificate.
2.6.3   Model forms
Typical forms for use when carrying out inspection and testing are included in Chapter
5   of this Guidance Note.
643.1   2.6.4   The sequence of tests
Initial   tests   should be carried   out   in the following sequence where relevant and practical:
ca)
(b)
(¢)
(d)
(e)
provided   during   erection
(f)
(8)
(h)
(i)
(i)
(k)
(|)
(M)
(II)
(0)
Continuity of protective conductors, including main and supplementary bonding
(see following item 2.6.5 and Regulation 648'>.2.l),
Continuity of ring final circuit conductors (2.6.6) (Regulation 643.2.1),
Insulation resistance (2.6.7) (Regulation 6433),
Protection by SELV.. PELV or by electrical separation (2.6.8, 2.69)   (Regulations
6454, 643.4.1, fa43.4.2),
Protection   by   barriers   or   enclosures   (2.6.ll)
(Regulation 64s.3.3),
Insulation resistance of   non-conducting floors and walls (2.6.l2)   (Regulation
6445);
Polarity (26.13) (Regulation 6436),
Protection by automatic disconnection of the supply (26.15) (Regulations 6433,
643.7.l),
Earth electrode resistance 2.6.l4) (Regulation 643.7.2),
Earth fault loop impedance (26.16) (Regulation 643.7.3),
Prospective fault current (2.6.l7)   (Regulation 643.7.3.201),
Additional protection (2.6.l9)   (Regulation 643.8),
Check of phase sequence (2   )   (Regulation 6439),
Functional testing (2.6.l9,   (Regulation 643.lO),
Verification of voltage drop (26.21) (Regulation 643.ll).
66   8
2.6.2f))
643.2   2.6.5   Continuity of protective conductors, including main and
supplementary bonding
411.:s.l.1   Regulation 411.3.1.I requires installations that provide protection against electric shock
using automatic disconnection of supply   must   have a circuit protective conductor run
to   and terminated   at   each point in the wiring and   at   each accessory. An exception   to
this is made for a lampholder having no exposed-conductive-parts and suspended
from such a point.
Regulation 643.211 requires that a continuity check be carried   out   on all protective
conductors. This includes the earthing conductor, the protective conductors of all
circuits, all main protective bonding conductors and, where applicable, all supplementary
bonding conductors.
12.1 Regulation 643.
conductor of e
conductors.
very
also requires that a continuity check be carried   out   on each
ring final circuit, which includes the line, neutral and protective
There are two widely used test methods that have evolved for checking protective
conductor continuity. 'Test method 1' uses the circuit cable shorted out and 'Test
method 2' uses a supplementary length of test cable (this method being popularly
known as the 'wandering lead' method).
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
41

Parallel earth paths and effects on   test   readings
Inspectors should always be aware of the possible   existence   of parallel earth   return
paths. These may take the form of metallic cable management products, extraneous-
conductive-parts   or   Indeed   other   metallic   parts.   Examples   Include   Installations
incorporating steel conduit, steel trunking, MICC, steel   wIre   armoured or other metal
sheathed cables,   equipment   and accessory boxes fitted   to   metal stud walls or   to
the building fabric, and lumInaIres fitted   In   grid ceilings. Such parallel paths   exist   In
domestic, commercial and IndustrIal Installations.
The effect of parallel earth   return   paths   Is   that the measured value of protective
conductor continuity, RQ. tends towards a zero value. lt   Is   often Impractical and   In
some cases Impossible   to   carry   out   testing with some or all of the parallel paths
disconnected and the   Inspector   must   be aware of this.
Instrument:   Use a low resistance ohmmeter for these   tests   - see Section 4.3.
The relevant conductors, mentioned above, should be tested   to   verify that they are
electrically sound and correctly connected.
Test method   1,   detailed in this item, as well as checking the continuity of the protective
conductor, also measures (R1 + RQ) which, when added   to   the external impedance
(Ze), enables the earth fault loop impedance (ZS)   to   be c ecked against the design
(see 2.6.l6). (RI + R2) is the sum of the resistances of the ine conductor, Rr, and the
circuit protective conductor, R2.
h
I
Test   readings may be affected by parallel paths through exposed-conductive-parts
and/or extraneous-conductiveparts.
Test method   I (for circuits)
Make a   temporary   shorting link of cable and   connect   the line conductor   to   the protective
conductor   at   the distribution board or consumer unit. Then test between line and earth
terminals   at   each outlet in the circuit as shown in Figure 2.1a. The resistance of the
test   leads should either be measured and deducted from the readings obtained, or
auto-nulled by the   test   instrument, which   most   modern instruments are able   to   do.
Where the installation has all-insulated wiring (see   notes   on parallel earth paths and
effects on test results above) and the cable accessories are not in   contact   with earth,
then this   test   measures (RI + RQ), i   the resistance of the line conductor, R1, plus
the resistance of the protective conductor, RQ, for that circuit which, if added   to   the
earth fault loop impedance   at   the distribution board, can be taken as the circuit's earth
fault loop impedance. It is important   to   record the value of (R1 + R2) obtained   at   the
circuit's extremity, namely the furthest circuit distance from the distribution board.
42
Guidance   note   3:   Inspection and Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology
I
I
I
I
I
.e.

.   .   .   .   .   .   .
I
.
.
I
.
.
r
temporary
* -|
®   ® H   V
l   l   I
Jiiii
Figure 2.la   Connections for testing continuity of protective conductors: method
E   N
®
1
_
q
1
4
Q
q.
i
* i
l
-
* II
4
l
* U
* l
1
*.
* * _ '4>   r
'v . f   i   I
I
r ..
u
I
J
d
I   \
|
**§.`
"l
.
5   *Q* '   4
1_»_
»`*
'   4
:
1 _
I I
l
.
* l
41
I
.
1
.
S
I
|
*.
g
1
-r
0
*.
g
5
'¢-
L'
g
.
ll-
*~r
'.
-
4-
.,,\
I
Q
4*
2
\\'l»11ih
\l\\~l1I»\
.1
'Q
*
s
:
:
is
ii*
\**
| . \ " '
-|,\*
| l»ll~1l~ll\IMI1l*"*'"*.
1li1\l*1*
go
main switch off
all fuses removed
circuit-breakers   off
i s ' -
- - ' :
:run
Note: remember   to
remove link after test
test instrument
Q J O U ,
Expected results for test method   I
The results should first and foremost indicate no discontinuity in the protective
conductors. For insulated wiring systems installed in conditions where accessory
boxes and similar are   not   connected   to   the fabric of the building or other elements
that may be earthed, then as stated earlier the readings measured will be the sum
of the line and protective conductor resistances (Ri +   R;_>). This test can detect
poor continuity   at   junctions and connections since, for a new installation with new
accessories, the contribution of resistance of healthy connections   to   the measured
resistance is negligible and can be ignored. Thus, by employing the resistance data for
copper conductors given in Appendix B, expected values for healthy circuits can be
approximated, and compared with the test readings obtained.
As an example, a radial circuit of length about 55 m with   2.5   mm? line and protective
conductors should have an (Rt + RQ) resistance as follows:
Length of circuit is 55
Resistance of a 2.5   conductor is   7.41   my/m   (at 20 °C) from Table B1
Theoretical minimum DC resistance = (55 x 2   X   7.41)/1000 = 0.82   Q
m
mm?
When verifying this circuit, the inspector should be looking for a reading somewhere
in the order of, say, 0.8   to   1.2   Q   would be acceptable. if the circuit had several
outlets, thus meaning that the circuit conductors were broken and connected in screw
terminals   at   each accessory, then a slightly higher value may be measured, as there
would be some resistance   at   the terminations.
Test method   2   (for circuits)
Instrument:   Use a low-resistance ohmmeter for this test. Refer to Section 4.3.
One lead of the test instrument is connected   to   the earth terminal   at   the distribution
board via a length of test cable or 'wandering lead'. The other   test   lead is used   to   make
contact with the protective conductor   at   various points on the   circuit   under test, for
example, luminaires, switches, fused connection units,   etc.   as shown in Figure 2.lb.
43
©
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedinology

'I'
.|.
The resistance of the wandering lead and the   test   leads are either measured and
deducted from the readings obtained, or auto-nulled by the test instrument, which
most   modern instruments are able to do these days
This   test   measures the continuity resistance of the circuit protective conductor, R2.
which should be recorded on the Schedule of Test Results (see earlier   note   regarding
'Parallel earth paths and effects on test readings').
v   Figure 2.lb   Connections for testing continuity of protective conductors: method   2
)(»
IL   E   N
J   r   J
I
I'
l
•   •
`
• .
*
' |   l'.` .l
f
5
:
I
5
I   ;;;   L
N
.*1
l
z
: l
*s
11U*1"*0
** .In
.\
*Q :
I
wandering
lead'
I   I
main switch off
all fuses removed
circuit-breakers off
test   instrument
O O
Expected results for test method   2
The results should first and foremost indicate no discontinuity in the protective
conductors. For insulated wiring systems installed in conditions where accessory boxes
and similar are not connected   to   the fabric of the building or other elements that may
be earthed, then the   measurement   will equate   to   the protective conductor resistance,
R   This test can detect poor continuity   at   junctions and connections since, for a new
installation with new accessories, the contribution of resistance of healthy connections
is negligible and can be ignored. Thus, by employing the resistance data for copper
conductors given in Appendix B, expected values for healthy cable and connections
can be checked.
As an example, a radial circuit of length about 55 m with a 2.5 mm? copper protective
conductor should have an R2 resistance as follows:
m Length of circuit is 55
Resistance of a 2.5   conductor is 7.41 my/m (at 20 °C) from Table B1
Theoretical minimum DC resistance   =   x   7.41)/1000
- 0.41   Q
mm
(55
When verifying this circuit, the inspector should be looking for a reading somewhere in
the order of, say 0.4   to   0.5   Q.   If the circuit had several outlets, thus meaning that the
protective conductor was broken and connected in screw terminals   at   each accessory,
then a slightly higher value may be measured, as there would be some resistance   at
e terminations. TI   1
Testing bonding conductors   earthing conductors and
44
Guidance note   3:   Inspection and Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology
2.
I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I

To confirm the continuity of these protective conductors,   test method 2   may be
used. Account should be taken of the possibility of   test   readings being affected by
parallel paths as mentioned earlier in this section. For this reason it may be necessary
to carry   out   the   test   with the protective conductor disconnected   at   one end, where
practicable.
This method can also be used   to   confirm a bonding connection between   extraneous-
conductive-parts where it is not possible   to   see a bonding connection, for example,
where bonding clamps have been 'built in'. The   test   would be done by connecting
the leads of the   test   instrument between any   two   points, such as metallic pipes, and
looking for a low reading of the order of 0.05   Q,   but do keep in mind that such a
reading for a single core 6.0 mm? or 10.0 mm' conductor,   equates   to   15 m and   25   m,
respectively. (It should be noted that not all low-resistance ohmmeters can read this
low, see Section 4.3) lt should be noted that this is not the R2 resistance measured
from the Main Earthing Terminal to the bonding clamp or adjacent pipework.
Where metallic enclosures have been used as the protective conductors, for example,
conduit, trunking, steel-wire   armouring, etc. the   following procedure should be
employed:
(a)
(b)
Inspect   the enclosure along its length for soundness of construction
Perform   the   standard   continuity   test   Using   the   appropriate   test   method
described above.
ln5trument:   Use a low-resistance ohmmeter for this   test   - Section 4.3.
Expected test results
The results should inst and foremost indicate no discontinuity in the protective
conductors. For lengths of conductor use Appendix   B   for resistance data. For joints
across bonds by earth clamps and similar, the readings should approach 0.05   Q   taking
into   account   both the resolution of the instrument, its accuracy   at   low values and
contact resistance.
2.6.6   Continuity of ring final circuit conductors
643.2.1   A three-step   test   is required to verify the continuity of the line, neutral and protective
conductors and the   correct   wiring of every ring final circuit. The   test   results show if the
ring has been interconnected   to   create   an apparently continuous ring circuit, which is
in fact broken or connected as a 'figure of eight' configuration.
Instrument:   Use a low-resistance ohmmeter for this   test   -   see Section 4.3.
Step 1
The line, neutral and protective conductors are visually identified   at   the distribution
board or consumer unit and the end-to-end resistance of each is measured separately
(see Figure 2.2a).
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
45

4
'-
-'-»_'.
L   4
so
Figure 2.2a   Connections for testing step   1
initial   ched(   for   continuity
lt   ends of ring
-11
.--15
test Instrument
Q   CO
[3   -
-
line
cp:
neutral
These resistances are referred   to   as   fl.   in   and   V2   respectively. A finite reading confirms
that there is no discontinuity on the ring conductors under test. The resistance values
obtained should be of the same order if the conductors are the same length, csa
and material. If the protective conductor has a smaller csa, the resistance   to   of the
protective conductor loop will be proportionally higher than that of the line or neutral
loop, for example, 1.67 times for 2.5/1.5 mm? cable. If the resistance readings are not
as expected this could mean the following:
(a)
(b)
readings lower than the expected resrstoncel,   would suggest that the ring is
incorrectly configured, possibly wired in a 'figure of eight' connection, this may
be further confirmed by the   step   2   test   below
readings higher than the expected   reslStance', would suggest that one or more
of the conductor terminations is poorly made
Note 1:   The 'expected   resistance'   mentioned above is that found from the tabulated
DC resistance for the conductor   Isa   per mere multiplied by the installed length
and corrected for measured   temperature.   A small allowance should be made for
instrument errors. Table   BI   gives values of DC resistance for conductors.
Step 2
The open ends of the line and neutral conductors are then connected together so that
the outgoing line conductor is connected to the returning neutral conductor and vice
versa (see Figure 2.2b).
Y   Figure 2.2b   Connections   for testing   step   2
connector   block
line
neutral
46
Guidance note   3:   Inspection and Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

The resistance between line and neutral conductors is measured   at   each socket-outlet.
The readings   at   each of the sockets wired into the ring should be substantially the
same and the value will be approximately one-quarter of the resistance of the line
plus the neutral loop resistances,   (or   + rn)/4 (see mathematical explanation in
Figure 2.3). Any sockets wired as spurs will give a higher resistance value due   to   the
resistance of the spur conductors.
i.e.
Note 1:
I I
Where single-core cables are used, care should be taken   to   verify that the line and
neutral conductors of opposite   ends of the ring circuit are connected together. An
error in this   respect   wi   apparent   from the readings taken   at   the socket-outlets,
progressively increasing in value as readings are taken towards the midpoint of the ring,
then decreasing again towards the other end of the ring.
Step   3
re open ends of the line conductor and cpc are then cross-connected (see Figure II
2.11.-
v   Figure   2.2¢   Connections for testing   step   3
connector   block
----
line
cpc
-   neutral
connections for   taking
(R1 + R2) readings   at
socket-outlets
The resistance between line and cpc is measured   at   each socket-outlet. The readings
obtained   at   each of the socket-outlet wired in the form of a ring will be substantially
the same and the value will be approximately   one-quarter   of the resistance of the
line plus cpc loop resistances, i.e. (f   t   + r   2)/4 (the explanation for this being similar
to   step   2). A higher resistance value will be recorded   at   any socket-outlets wired as
spurs. The highest value recorded   represents   the maximum (Re + R2) of the circuit
and is recorded on the Schedule of Test Results. The value can be used   to   determine
the earth fault loop impedance (ZS) of the circuit   to   verify compliance with the loop
impedance requirements of the Regulations (see Section 2.6.15).
Where every socket-outlet on a ring final circuit is connected in the form of a ring (i.e. no
spurs), the following formula is true: RI+R2=(rI+r2)/4. The inspector is again reminded
to   take   note   of the effects of possible parallel   return   paths on these continuity tests,
described in 2.6.5.
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
47

.   U
I __
l
0 0
I
I   I
l
v   Figure   2.3   Explanation of the maths for step 2
Figures   to   explain the expected results for a correctly wired ring circuit. 283a   e
a
Origin
Test point A for
mathematical explanation
Open loop   resistance   =   0.6   O
Figure   above is an example of a correctly wired ring, the open loop resistances
from   step   l   being   of   Q.   A test point about a third distance round the ring is used   to
illustrate the maths as explained below.
a
b
Origin
JL
0.2 O
|
_ _ _
*
-
_ *.
-.
I   I
Test point A
0.4   n
.r
Figures   and c show the resistances of each leg of the ring as a   test   is applied   at   this
point as per step 2 (line-neutral).
b
c
DEC!
L1   0.2 D
I
N1   0.2   n
N2   0.4   D   I
I
L2   0.4 D
*e
equivalent connects are then represented in figure
48
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
:Q
d.
I

0.4 Q   0.2   Q
I   I I   I
4
1
0.6   Q
I   I
d
L2
L1
an
I   I
I   I   I
OCJF3.
I
TestT   pint   A
¢
No
q
I
I   I
I   I
N1
equivalent circuit diagram and resultant resistance are shown in figure
0.2   Q   0.4   Q   0.6   O
I   I   I   I   I
0.3   Q
_   _
I   I
I   I   I   I   I   I
Thus, in summary the open loop resistances are 0.6 ohm for both line and neutral,
giving an (ii + rn) value of (0.6 + 0.6), or 1.2 ohms.
From Figure   above it can be seen that a correctly connected ring will give a step 2
lading of a quarter of the (al + rn) value, or:
e
643.3
Rstep 2   test
r
("1+l'nl
4
;
in this
14
case   ' 2 = 0 . 3 o h m
2.6.7   Insulation resistance
Insulation resistance testing is a fundamental   test   for inspectors. Often on larger
construction sites, cables will be insulation resistance tested during various stages of
installation   to   prove the integrity of installed cables.   It   is always preferred   to   re-test
cables and equipment for insulation resistance as   part   of initial verification as well as
during construction.
643.3   BS 7671 requires that insulation resistance is measured between all of the live
conductors and between the live conductors and the protective conductor with the
protective conductor connected   to   the earthing arrangement. This key change to how
the procedure currently worded was introduced in the l 7th Edition in 2008 and is an
important change   to   practice for many installers and inspectors. Taking cables as an
example, previously it was acceptable   to   test   a cable between the various cores, and
test   to   earth (which was actually only the cpc, such as a single core conductor, or the
armouring or sheath of the cable), sometimes these cables were terminated without
further testing. This is not acceptable now and it is essential   to   test   to   the protective
conductor (such as armouring) with it connected   -   via a fly-lead if necessary
- to the
installation earthing   arrangement.   This is shown in Figure 2.4c. lt is a good idea   to   test
all cables, including those tested during the construction stage using this method.
49
*Co
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
e.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The purpose of the insulation resistance   test   is   to   verify that the insulation of conductors
provides adequate electrical insulation, is   not   damaged and that live conductors or
protective conductors are not short-circuited.
Asa   reminder,   prior   to   carrying   out   the   test,   check that:
(a)
(b)
on
(4)
the protective conductor of the item (switchgear or cable etc.) is connected   to
the main earthing terminal, which   must   be connected   to   the means of earthing
pilot or indicator lamps, and capacitors are disconnected from circuits   to   avoid
an inaccurate   test   value being obtained (see   note   below)
voltage-sensitive   electronic   equipment   such   as   dimmer   switches,   touch
switches,   delay   timers, power   controllers,   electronic   starters   for   fluorescent
lamps, emergency lighting, RaDs and similar equipment are disconnected so
that they are   not   subjected   to   the test voltage. The functional earthing leads of
RCBOS should also be disconnected so that a low insulation resistance reading
or damage   to   an RCBO will   not   be caused.
the incoming neutral has been disconnected/isolated, where necessary, so that
there is no connection   to   Earth.
(Great care should be taken when removing neutral conductors or neutral links on
installations as the   moment   the neutral is removed it may become live if there is a
"borrowed neutral" on the installation. Insulated tools should be used for this task.)
Note:   b and   C   are necessary because, as testing occurs between all conductors, anything
connected and in circuit will be subjected   to   the   test   voltage.
Instrument:   Use an insulation resistance   tester   - see Section 4.4.
Table 64   Insulation resistance tests should be carried   out   using the appropriate DC test voltage
specified in Table   64   of BS   7671.   The installation will be deemed   to   conform with
the Regulations in this respect if the main switchboard and each distribution circuit
tested separately, with all its final circuits connected but with current-using equipment
disconnected, has an insulation resistance not less than that specified in Table 64,
reproduced here as Table 2.2.
v   Table 2.2   Minimum values of insulation resistance
250
500
0.5
1.0
SELV and PELV
p   to   and including 500 Vwith the exception
f SELV and PELV but including FELV
bove 500 V   1000   1.0
Simple installations that contain no distribution circuits should preferably be tested as
a whole, see example in Figure 2.4a.
The   tests   should be carried   out   with the main switch off, all fuses in place, switches
and circuit-breakers closed (i.e. in their 'on' positions), lamps removed, and fluorescent
and other discharge luminaires and other equipment disconnected. Where the removal
of lamps and/or the disconnection of current-using equipment is impracticable, the
50
Guidance   note   3:   Inspection and Testing
e The Institution of Engineering and Technology

.   9
O
•   * I]
.   .
0
local switches controlling such lamps and/or equipment should be open. An insulation
resistance test of L&N connected together to E will ensure that all the circuit conductors
are tested. Where there are special lighting controls such as   contactor   switching all the
circuit wiring, including such switch lines,   must   be included in the testing.
To perform the test in a complex installation it may need   to   be subdivided into its
component parts.
Although an insulation resistance value as low as 1   MQ   would comply with the
requirements of the Regulations, a new installation should   not   yield a   test   result this
low and in new installations a value below 20   MQ   should be investigated.
Exam ple (i)   -   Insulation resistance test of a whole consumer unit
Figure 2.4a   Example of an insulation resistance   test   of   whole consumer unit a
ceiling rose
1
1   I   I I
I
two-way switches   switch   on
I   J H H J H I   is
main switch off
circuit-breakers on
lamps removed
main   equipoterutia I
bonding conductor
too.
test   instrument
earthing
conductor
Figure   2.4a   'shows an example of testing a whole consumer unit (i.e. installation) in
one   test   (only the   L-N   test is shown). The   tests   required are a test between the live
conductors (L-N) and tests between the live conductors and earth (L-E and N-E).
For circuits containing two-way switched or two-way and intermediate switched, the
switches   must   be operated one   at   a time and the circuits subjected to additional
insulation resistance   test   in these configurations.
For circuits and/or equipment that is vulnerable   to   the test voltage, the line and neutral
conductors can be linked/connected together and a   test   made between the linked
conductors and protective Earth (as in L&N - E). It is essential that the incoming earth
connection is connected to the main earthing terminal of the installation (and that this
is connected   to   the means of earthing) for these   tests.
Exam   -   Insulation   resistance test of a final circuit
Figure 2.4b shows an example of testing a single ilnal circuit at a consumer unit
(only the line   to   neutral   test   is shown). The   tests   required are a test between the live
conductors (L-N) and tests between the live conductors and earth (L-E and N-E).
ple (ii)
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedtnology
in
51

.   nr
0
.
' U *
I
U
For circuits containing two-way switches or two-way and intermediate switches, the
switches   must   be operated one   at   a time and the circuits subjected   to   additional
insulation resistance   test   in these configurations.
For circuits and/or equipment vulnerable   to   the test voltage, the line and neutral
conductors can be linked/connected together and a   test   made between the linked
conductors and protective Earth (as in L&N - E). It is essential that the incoming earth
connection is connected   to   the main earthing terminal of the installation (and that this
is connected   to   the means of earthing) for these   tests.
v   Figure   2   4b   Example of insulation resistance   test   of a final circuit
I
ceiling   rose
I
I 1 1 r 1 l 1 ~ . - 1 - I
two-way switches   switch   on
I J J J J J J J H
w
main switch off
circuit-breakers on   lamps removed
main equipotential
I bonding conductor
U
la
Q
test instrument
earthing
conductor
notes:   (a)
(b)
the   test   should be initially carried   out   on the complete installation
bonding and earthing connections are in place
Insulation resistance testing of a three-phase   4-core   power cable
To"   b e is tested as per Table   2.3.
'P   r.
Y   Table 2.3   Insulation resistance   test   on   4-core   power cable
52
Guidance   note   3: Inspection and Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology
31
l
.1

Note   1:   It is essential for   tests   5 and   6   that the protective conductor of the cable is connected
to the installation's earthing arrangement.
Tests   4   and   5   can be done individually   L   core by core   to   N   and   E.
For experienced inspectors and testers, Table   2.3a   shows how it is possible   to   reduce
the number of   steps   for insulation resistance   to   four, but should any test yield a reading
lower than referred   to   in Table 2.2, it will be necessary   to   follow the sequence stated
in Table 2.3   to   identify which conductors are affected.
note   2:
'Y
Table 2.3a   Four   step   insulation resistance   test   on   4-core   power cable
ESt
est
1   All live conductors linked together   to   Earth
All line conductors to Neutral
L1 and L2 linked together   to   L Test 3
est
2
+ LE + N to E
tO
+   L-;»   to   L
L1   to   L2 (connected   to   L
v   Figure   2.4¢   Insulation testing of a   4-core   power cable (showing the neutral   to   earth test)
armoured cable
4   connection   for
test   purpose
test instrument
connected
to   MET
O U
Insulation resistance readings obtained should be   not   less than the minimum values
referred   to   in Table 2.2.
643.3   2.6.8   Confirming   SELV   or PELV circuits by insulation resistance
testing
Sed   414   In   order   to   establish which insulation resistance tests are required for verifying a SELV
or PELV   system,   the requirements of Section 414 of BS 7671   must   first be understood.
There are situations where the provision of insulation of SELV or PELV circuits for basic
protection is generally   not   required by BS 7671, i.e. for the following voltages:
414.45
*
up to 12 V AC or 30 V DC in wet areas
l>   up   to   25   V   AC or 60   V   DC in dry areas
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
53

Part   7   However, for locations containing a bath or shower, or in swimming pools, saunas and
some other special locations, basic protection by insulation is required for SELV and
PELV at all voltages.
It   is often, therefore, easier   to   carry out insulation resistance   tests   on these circuits as
a   matter   of course.
Where SELV or PELV is used as a protective measure and insulation resistance testing
is required, Tables   2.4   and 2.5   set   out   the requirements.
Instrument:   Use an insulation resistance tester for these tests. Refer to Section   4.4.
643.3.2   v   Table 2.4   SELV insulation resistance tests
aspic
sulation
Between live conductors and all other
circuits including other SELV and PELV
and low voltage circuits
250
Note:   In   situations where the SELV conductors are separated by just insulation, such as within
a multicore cable with low voltage circuits, then the   test   voltage shall be increased   to
$00   V   DC   and the insulation resistance shall be   not   less than   1   MQ
643.4.2   v   Table 2.5   PELV insulation resistance   tests
Basic
insulation
Between live conductors and all other
circuits including other SELV and PELV
and low voltage circuits
250   0.5
Note:   In   situations where the   PELV   conductors are separated by just insulation, such as within
a multicore cable with low voltage circuits,   ten   the test voltage shall be increased   to
500   v   DC and the insulation resistance shall be   not   less than I   MQ.
643.4.3   2.6.9   Testing of electrically separated circuits
413.3.2   The source of supply should be inspected   to   confirm compliance with the Regulations.
In addition, should any doubt exist, the voltage should be measured   to   verify it does
not   exceed   500   V.
Insulation tests are then made as detailed in Table 2.6.
Instrument:   Use an insulation resistance tester for these   tests.   Refer to Section   4.4.
54
Guidance   note   3:   Inspection and Testing
o The Institution of Engineering and Technology

v   Table 2.6   Tests made to verify electrical separation
one   it
418.3.4   (a)   I
\   .'
.r
a
418.3.5   (b)
41l_3_6
418.31
Table 41.2
Table   41.3
Table   41.1
Additional inspections and tests for separated circuit supplying more than
em   of current-using equipment:
Ap   continuity   test   between all exposed-conductive-parts of the separated
circuit   to   ensure that they are bonded together. The non-earthed protective
bonding   conductor   should   then   be   subjected   to   a   500   v   oc   insulation
resistance test between it and the protective conductor or exposed-conductive-
parts   of   other   circuits,   or   to   extraneous-   conductive-parts.   The   insulation
resistance should be   not   less than   1.0   mo. Instruments:   Use a low-resistance
ohmmeter and an insulation resistance tester for these   tests.   Refer   to   Chapter 4
of this Guidance   Note.
All socket-outlets must be inspected   to   ensure that the protective conductor
contact   is connected   to   the non-earthed protective bonding   system.
(c) All   flexible cables   other   than those supplying Class   II   equipment must be
inspected   to   ensure that they contain a protective conductor for use as an
unearthed protective bonding conductor.
Operation of the protective device   must   be verified by   measurement   of the
fault loop impedances (i.e. between live conductors)   to   the various items of
connected   equipment.   These   values   should   then   be   compared   with   the
maximum 25 value required by Regulation 411.4.5, with reference   to   the type
and rating of the protective device for the separated circuit. For   235   v   systems,
Tables 41.2 and   41.3   of Chapter   41   of BS 7671 may be used for the maximum
Z5   values   for   fuses   and   circuit-breakers   respectively. Although   these tables
pertain   to   the line/protective conductor loop path, and the measured values are
between live conductors, they give   a   reasonable approximation   to   the values
required   to   achieve the required disconnection time of Table   41.1.
(d)
2.6.10 Testing of functional extra-low voltage (FELV) circuits
411.1   A FELV system is an extra-low voltage system meeting the requirements of Regulation
Group 411.7 (Functional extra-low voltage (FELV)). The system does not meet all
the requirements of Section   414   of BS 7671 relating   to   5ELV or PELV, and it use is
permitted only where SELV or PELV are not necessary.
p
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedtnology
55

643.3.2   Regulation 6-43.3.2 requires that FELV circuits shall meet the test requirements for low
voltage circuits (such as 'mains voltage' circuits). This includes the testing   of;
643.2
643.3
(a)
(b)
416.2   (c)   barrier   or
and
645.6   (d)
continuity of protective conductors (see 2.6,5),
insulation resistance (see 2.6.7), the test voltage being 500 V DC and the
minimum insulation resistance being   1   MQ,
basic protection by   a   enclosure provided during erection   of   the
installation (see 2.6.iI),
polarity (see 2.6.13).
It should also be checked by inspection that:
a"
'R
(3)
(b)
(11)
the   exposed-conductive~parts   of   the   FELV   system   are   connected   to   the
protective conductor of the primary circuit of the source, provided that the
primary circuit is subject   to   protection by automatic disconnection of supply in
accordance with Regulation 411.3 to 6, and
the   source   of   the   FELV   system   is   one   that   meets   the   requirements   of
Regulation 411.7.-4, and
plugs, socket-outlets, LSCs, DiaLs and cable couplers in a FELV   system   are
required to have a protective conductor contact (connected to the protective
conductor) and   not   be dimensionally compatible with those used for any other
systems   in use   at   the same premises.
434.5   Automatic disconnection of supply for protection against electric shock is not required
in a FELV   system,   but may be required for other reasons, such as protection against
thermal effects.
642.3
416.21
416.2.2
416.2.1
2.6.11   Protection by barriers or enclosures provided during erection
This   test   is   not   applicable to barriers or enclosures of factory-built equipment and
these will have been tested and certified by the manufacturer.   It   is applicable   to   those
constructed on site during the course of assembly or erection and therefore is seldom
necessary.
411   Whilst enclosures are covered by product standards, barriers may   not   be and the
inspector   must   use engineering judgement in deciding if a barrier is fit for purpose.
418.1.2
643.5
2.6.12 Proving and testing of non-conducting location (insulation
resistance/impedance of floors and walls)
Where fault protection is provided by a non-conducting location, which should be
remembered as a measure of protection not recognised for general application, the
following should be verified, prior   to   carrying   out   insulation testing:
418.13
(H)
418.1.3
Exposed-conductive-parts should be inspected   to   confirm that under ordinary
circumstances no one can come into simultaneous   contact   with:
two   exposed-conductive-parts, or
an exposed-conductive-part and any extraneous-conductive-part
(i)
(ii)
418.1.4
if these parts are liable   to   be   at   different potentials through failure of the
basic insulation of   a   live part.
(b)
(cl
In a non-conducting location there   must   be no protective conductors
Any socket-outlets installed in the location must not incorporate an earthing
contact.
56
Guidance   Note   3:   Inspection and Testing
e The Institution of Engineering and Technology
4.
.1
I
I

418.1.5
643.3
Following these checks, the insulation resistance between the insulating floors and
walls   to   the installation main earthing terminal (via a local earth terminal of the general
installation) should be measured. lt is required that   at   least three   measurements   are
made. One   measurement must   be made approximately one   metro   from any accessible
extraneous-conductive-part, for example, metal pipe, in the location and the other
measurements   should be made   at   distances further away. Methods of measuring the
insulation resistance/impedance of floors and walls are described below.
Test method
The insulation resistance   test   may be made using an insulation resistance   tester,   see
Section 4.4, and the test is made between   test   electrode   I   or   test   electrode 2 (see
Figures   2.5a   and 2.5b) and the main protective conductor of the installation.
Apps   13   Measuring insulation resistance of floors and walls
A   magneto-ohmmeter   or   battery-powered   insulation   resistance   tester   providing
a no-load voltage of approximately   500   V (or 1000   v   if the rated voltage of the
installation exceeds   $00   V) is used as a   DC   source.
The resistance is measured between the   test   electrode and the main protective
conductor of the installation.
The test electrodes may be either of the following   types.
of test electrode   1   is the reference method.
In   case of dispute, the use
It   is recommended that the test be made before the application of the surface
treatment (varnishes, paints and similar products).
Test electrode   I
The   test   electrode shown in Figure   2.5a   comprises a metallic tripod of which the
parts resting on the floor form the points of an equilateral triangle. Each supporting
part is provided with a flexible base ensuring, when loaded, close contact with the
surface being tested over an area of approximately 900 mm   and having a combined
resistance of less than 5000   Q   between the terminal and the conductive rubber pads.
Before   measurements   are made, the surface being tested is cleaned with a cleaning
liquid. While   measurements   of the floors and walls are being made, a force of
approximately 750 N (75 kg in weight) for floors or 250 N for walls, is applied   to   the
tripod.
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
57

E521
_s-"'
933
Fig   I m p   Figure 2.5a   Test electrode I
I   12539
Q -   b
180
5   mm   )
aluminum plate
I
-   I   n
25
view   from above
*R:20
profile view
section of a   contact   stud   in
a conductive rubber
attach by   screw,
washer and   nut
Dimensions in millimetres
terminal
contact stud in
conductive rubber
\ \ I I
v   ew from   below
Test electrode 2
The   test   electrode shown in Figure 2.5b comprises a square metallic plate with sides
that measure 250 mm and a square of dampened, water-absorbent paper, or doth,
from which surplus   water   has been removed, with sides that measure approximately
270 mm. The paper or cloth, as applicable, is placed between the metal plate and the
surface being tested. During   measurement   a force of approximately 750 N (75 kg in
weight) for floors or 250 N for walls is applied on the plate.
Fig   use   v   Figure   z.sb   Test electrode 2
wooden plate
metal   plate
damp cloth   \_
'Y
floor covering
750   N
L
subfloor
|.
PE
58
Guidance   note   3:   Inspection and Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

Expected results
The Moors and walls are considered   to   be non-conducting where the measured
resistances are at least 50   kg   (where the system voltage   to   Earth does   not   exceed
500 V).
643.5   A further   test   is specified in BS   7671   for extraneous-condudive-parts that are within
the location but   to   which insulation has been applied during construction.   In   these
cases a 'flash' insulation   tester   is required which, after the standard   500   v insulation
test, applies a   2   kV   AC   runs test and measures the leakage   current   (which should   not
exceed   1   mA).
643.6   2.6.13 Polarity testing
The polarity of all circuits   must   be verified before connection   to   the supply, with either
an ohmmeter or the continuity range of an insulation and continuity   tester.   A typical
test on a lighting circuit is shown in Figure   2.6.
Alternatively, polarity can be verified by visually checking core colors   at   terminations,
thus verifying the installer's connections. Whatever method is used, polarity checks are
required   at   all points on a circuit.
Instrument:   Use a low-resistance ohmmeter for these tests   - see Section 4.3.
A test for polarity is necessary   to   ensure all fuses and single-pole control and protective
devices are connected in the line conductor. The   centre   contact   of screw-type
lamp folders   must   be connected   to   the line conductor (except E14 and E27   to   BS
EN   60238)   so this needs   to   be verified as does the   correct   connection of all non-
reversible plugs and socket-outlets.
Note:   The continuity   test   (see 2.65) and ring final circuit continuity test (see 2.6.6) helps   to
confirm polarity.
Figure 2.6   Polarity   test   on a lighting circuit
ceiling rose
at   end of drcult
*
temporary Iir k
switch
O   I
_
•
I   111 111 I   I   I   I
I   I
I   I I   I
r I
l
1
'I
\
a ' -
main switch off
all fuses removed
circuit-breahers off
lamps removed
test instrument   U U
Note:   The   test   may be carried   out   either   at   lighting points or switches
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
Q   the Institution of Engineering and Tedinology
59

REMEMBER TO REMOVE THE TEMPORARY SHORTING LINK WHEN TESTING
IS COMPLETE.
643.12
542.1
542.2
2.6.14 Earth electrode resistance testing
Three methods of measuring the resistance of an earth electrode are described in this
section. Test method El   uses a dedicated earth electrode tester (fall of potential,
three- or four-terminal type), test method E2 uses a dedicated earth electrode   tester
(stakeless or probe type) and   test   method ET uses an earth fault loop impedance
tester.
electrode/
Test method El: Measurement using dedicated earth electrode tester
(fall of potential, three- or four-terminal type)
For safety reasons, it is essential   to   ensure that the installation is securely isolated from
the supply.   It   is also necessary   to   disconnect the earthing conductor from the earth
MET.   Caution: If this is the only earth electrode this may leave the
installation unprotected   against earth faults and complete isolation of the
installation must be made.   will ensure that the   test   current   only
passes through the earth electrode and   not   through any parallel paths. The installation
must   remain isolated from the supply until all testing has been completed and the
earth electrode connection reinstated.
This disconnection
Ideally, the   test   should be carried   out   when the ground conditions are least favourable,
such as when the soil is frozen or very dry- Refer   to   Annex   C   of iEC   60364-6   for further
guidance.
The test requires the use of   two   temporary   test   spikes (electrodes), and is carried   out
in the following manner:
Connection   to   the earth electrode is made using terminals   Ci   and   Pl   of a four-terminal
earth tester. To exclude the resistance of the   test   leads from the resistance reading,
individual leads should be taken from these terminals and connected separately   to
the electrode. Where the   test   lead resistance is insignificant, the   two   terminals may be
linked together   at   the test instrument and connection made with a single   test   lead, the
same being   true   if using a three-terminal   tester.   Connection to the   temporary   spikes is
made as shown in Figure   2.7.
v   Figure   2.1   Typical earth electrode   test   using a three- or four-terminal   tester
test instrument
D   LU   Q
temporary
test   electrodes
Electrode
60
Guidance   note   3:   Inspection and Testing
o   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

The distance between the   tes   is important. if they are   too   dose together their
resistance   areas   will overlap.   I   reliable results may be expected if the distance
between the electrode under   test   and the   current   spike, C2, is   at   least   ten   times the
maximum dimension of the electrode   system,   for example,   30   m for a   3   m long rod
electrode.
U   general,
t   spik(2»Q
Three readings are taken:
(a)
pmtentia
he   CLIITQI
(b)
(¢)
firstly, with the   I spike, T2, inserted midway between the electrode
under   test   and   t   it   spike, Tl
secondly, with T2 moved   to   a position   IO   0/o   of the overall electrode-to-   current
spike distance back towards the electrode under   test
last, with   T2   moved   to   a position 10   0/o   of the overall distance towards the
current spike, from its initial position between the electrode under test and Tl.
By   comparing the three readings, a percentage deviation can be determined. This is
calculated by taking the average of the three readings, finding the maximum deviation
of the readings from this average in ohms, and expressing this as a   percentage   of the
average.
The accuracy of the measurement using this technique is typically   I   times the
percentage deviation of the readings.   It   is difficult   to   achieve an   accuracy of   measurement
better than   2   0/0,   and inadvisable   to   accept readings that differ by more than s   0/0.   In
this   event,   to   improve the accuracy of the   measurement   the test must be repeated
with a larger separation between the electrode under   test   and the current spike.
The test instrument output may be AC or reversed DC   to   overcome electrolytic effects.
Because these instruments employ phase-sensitive detectors, the errors associated
with   stray   currents are eliminated.
The instrument should be capable of checking that the resistance of the   temporary
spikes used for   testify   within the accuracy limits stated in the instrument specification.
This may be achieved by an indicator provided on the instrument, or the instrument
should have a sufficiently high upper range   to   enable a discrete   test to   be performed
on the spikes.
g   i x
In   no circumstances should
the latter technique be used to temporarily reduce the resistance of the
earth electrode under test.
Where the resistance of the temporary spikes is   too   high, measures   to   reduce the
resistance will be necessary, such as driving the spikes deeper into the ground or
watering with brine   to   improve   contact resistance. al
`1
P
ON COMPLETION OF THE   TEST,   ENSURE THAT THE EARTHING CONDUCTOR
IS   RECONNECTED,   BEFORE   THE   INSTALLATION   IS   ENERGISED   (OR
RE-ENERGISED).
b
6417.2
542.1
542.2
Test method E2: Measurement using dedicated stakeless or clamp
ased earth electrode tester
A   num   Jf   types   of earth electrode resistance tester are available that utilise clamps
and can carry out measurements without the earth electrode under test having to be
disconnected from the installation. The use of   two   such types is described here.
Ber   I
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
.2
61

Instrument   using one   test   coil
The instrument described here uses a method of   measurement   similar   to   the fall of
potential method (Method Er, described earlier), in that it uses   two   temporary   test
spikes (electrodes), as shown in Figure 2.8. These are placed in the ground, away
from the earth electrode under   test,   in similar fashion to that described for the fall in
potential method.
v   Figure 2.8   Instrument   using one   test   coil
To main
earthing
terminal
of installation
Test
instrument
O O O ,
Clamp containing
test   coil
Electrode
under test
15-25m   15-25m
The damp containing the   test   coil is placed around the earth electrode under   test,
or around the conductor connected   to   that electrode. This eliminates the effects of
parallel resistances so that only the resistance earth electrode under test is measured.
The resulting level of accuracy is similar   to   that given by 'fall of potential' method.
Instrument using two test coils
The instrument described here relies for its operation on there effectively being a
number of earth electrodes within the installation,   not   just the electrode under   test.
The electrodes other than the one under test might not be actual earth electrodes,
they might be extraneous-conductive-parts buried in the ground or in concrete buried
in the ground, such as metallic services pipes or buried structural metalwork.
The instrument uses two coils placed a small distance apart around the earthing
conductor of the installation, as shown in Figure   2.9,   by means of clamps forming part
of the instrument.   In   practice the coils may be combined into a single clamp. One coil
induces a known voltage in a loop circuit containing the earth electrode under   test,
the general mass of Earth and other connections with Earth within the installation. The
second coil measures the test current.
62
Guidance note   3:   Inspection and Testing
o   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

Figure 2.9   Instrument   using   two   test coils
Main earthing terminal
of installation
Voltage
coil
Constant
applied
a.c. voltage
Current
coil
Induced
current
measurement
device
Electrode under
test (having
resistance
RE   to   Earth)
The instrument carries   out   a calculation using the formula below. This produces a
resistance reading intended   to   represent   the resistance of the earth electrode under
test.
Rreading
:   RE
+
1
_ 1   _ |   I
l
R]+R2IR3+..,+Rn
Where:
Rreading is the resistance reading given by the   test   instrument
RE is the actual resistance of the earth electrode under   test
RI, R2   etc.   are the resistances of the other 'earth electrodes'
The accuracy of the   test   reading (Rreading) depends on the existence of multiple parallel
paths for the returning   test   current   to the instrument, such that the effective parallel
resistance of these paths is low enough   to   be neglected.
For example, if there are four other 'earth electrodes', effectively connected in parallel,
each h   in   a resistance of, say, 40   Q,   their combined resistance would be   10   Q.   If the
resistance of the earth electrode under   test   was tOO   Q,   the total resistance, Rreadingr
measured by the test instrument would be 100   Q   +10   o   =lI0   Q.   Consequently, the
measured value (Rreading) would be   II()   0/0   of the actual value (RE), an error of   10   0/0.
as
However, if there was only one earth electrode other than the one under test, the error
in the   measurement   could be significantly   greater,   as the effective path would then
be through   two   electrodes effectively connected in series. Using the same values as
in the previous example, this would mean resistance, Rteading, measured by the test
instrument would be 100   Q   +   40   Q   =140   Q.   Consequently Rreadin8
would then be
140   0/0   of the actual value   (RE),   an error of 40   0/0.
63
Q
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedtnology

Test method E3: Measurement using   earth fault loop impedance tester
An earth electrode may be tested using an earth iaull   loop   impedance   tester.   However,
it is recognised that the results may not be as   accurate   as using a dedicated earth
electrode tester.
an
FOR SAFETY REASONS, THE INSTALLATION MUST BE lsoLATEo FROM THE SUPPLY
BEFORE   DISCONNECTING   THE   EARTHING   CONDUCTOR.   The   earth   fault   loop
impedance   tester   is connected between the line conductor   at   the source of the
installation and the earth electrode via the earthing conductor, and a test performed.
The impedance reading taken is treated as the electrode resistance.
ON COMPLETION OF THE TEST ENSURE THAT THE EARTHING CONDUCTOR
is   RECONNECTED BEFORE THE SUPPLY IS ENERGISED (OR RE-ENERGISED).
Results d   earth electrode testing
low
be
I
U   5
) \
N-S systems and   generator   supplies, electrode resistance values may not have
'pecified, as there is a   separate   metallic earth conductor and electrodes often
sir   provide a local reference earth. M   if
For TT   systems,   in the absence of the designer's specification, BS   7671   maximum
values for RCDs are as follows:
411.5.3   Regulation 411   requires: 5.3
(al)   The   disconnection
Regulation 4H.3.2.3
time   shall   be
or 411.3.2.4, and
that   required   by   Regulation   411 .3.2.2,
(b)
where:
The maximum disconnection time required by Table 41.1 of BS 7671 (for final circuits
rated   at   not   more than either 63 A with one or more socket-outlets or 32 A supplying
fixed   current   using equipment only) at a nominal voltage   to   Earth,   UO,   of 230   v   is   O.2s
where an RCD is used for fault protection.
The maximum disconnection time required by Regulation 411.3.2.4 (for a distribution
circuit or a circuit   not   covered by Regulation 411   is 1 s. 5.21)
RA
'An
is the sum of the resistances of the earth electrode and the protective
conductor(s) connecting it   to   the exposed-conductive-parts (in ohms)
is the rated residual operating   current   of the RCD (in amps).
For a nominal voltage, Uo. of   230   v,   Table 2.7 gives maximum values of Z5 for non-
delayed RCDS, which may be substituted for RA in equation (b), above.
64
Guidance   note   3:   Inspection and Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

v   Table 2.7   Maximum values of earth fault loop impedance (ZS) for non-delayed RCDs   to
BS EN 61008-1 and BS EN 61009-1 for UP of 230   v
Table 41
30   1667
100   500
300   167
10   0
Where a time-delayed RCD is used   to   provide fault protection the maximum value of
earth fault loop impedance including the earth electrode resistance must be such that
the requirements of 411.3 and 411.5 are   met.   This is likely   to   require a lower figure
than given above.
The table indicates that the use of a suitably rated RCD will theoretically allow much
higher values of RA, and therefore of Zs, than could be expected by using the circuit
overcurrent   devices for fault protection.
*It is advised though, in Note 2 of Table 41.5, that earth electrode resistance values
above 200   Q   may   not   be stable, as soil conditions change due   to   factors such as soil
drying and freezing.
643.7   2.6.15   Protection by automatic disconnection of supply
The effectiveness of measures for fault protection by automatic disconnection of
supply can be verified for installations within a TN   system   by:
to)
(b)
(¢)
measurement   of earth fault loop impedance (as described in 2.6.16 below),
confirmation by visual inspection that   overcurrent   devices have suitable short-
time or instantaneous tripping setting for circuit-breakers, or   current   rating (In)
and type for fuses, and
where RCDs are employed, testing to confirm that the disconnection times of
Chapter   41   of BS 7671 can be met (see 2.6.16 and 2619).
For installations within a TT   system,   effectiveness can be verified by:
to)
(b)
(r)
h
measurement of the resistance of the earthing arrangement of the exposed-
conductive-parts of the equipment for the circuit in question,
confirmation by visual inspection that   overcurrent   devices have suitable short-
time or instantaneous tripping setting for circuit-breakers, or current rating (In)
and   type   for fuses, and
where RCDs are employed, testing   to   confirm that the disconnection times of
C apter   41   of BS 7671 can be met (see 2.6.16 and 2619).
643.13   2.6.16 Earth fault loop impedance verification
Where limitation of earth fault loop impedance is part of a protective measure, then
it is fundamental that the initial verification process includes verification of earth fault
loop impedances.
The earth fault   current   loop comprises the following elements, starting   at   the point of
fault on the line-earth fault loop:
.5
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
65

(a)
(b)
(¢)
the circuit protective conductor,
the main earthirrg terminal and earthirrg conductor;
for TN   systems,   the metallic return path or, in the case of TT and   IT   systems,
the earth return path,
the path through the earthed   neut   point of the transformer,
the transformer winding (or the equivalent in another source of energy), and
the line conductor from the 'source'   to   the point of   fault;
raj
643.13   There are   two   methods used for verifying total earth fault loop impedance for a circuit:
(a)
(b)
measurement   of total earth fault loop impedance (2.5) using an earth fault loop
impedance   tester,   where it is safe   to   do so; and
measurement   of (RI + R2) during continuity testing of a circuit (see 2.6.5 and
2.6.6 ) and addition   to   the measured earth fault loop impedance external   to
that circuit (Ze).
The latter is preferred when determining Z5 for final circuits and distribution circuits.
Measurement of total earth fault loop impedance (ZS) using an earth fault
loop impedance   tester
Measurement of ZS is made on a live installation and, for safety and practical reasons,
neither the connection with Earth nor bonding conductors are disconnected.
Instrument:   Use   an earth fault loop impedance   tester   for this test - Section 4.5.
Measurement of (Rr   + RQ) during continuity   testing of   a circuit   and
addition   to   the earth fault loop impedance external to that circuit (ze)
This procedure is described in Section 2.6.5 and, for ring circuits, Section 2.6.6, and
the (Ri + RQ) value recorded for   a   particular circuit is added to the earth fault loop
impedance   at   the origin of that circuit.
For a consumer unit   at   the origin of an installation, this is as follows:
Z 5 = Z e + ( R I +R;)
where:
Zs
Ze
(RI + RQ)
is the total earth fault loop impedance in ohms
is the external earth fault loop impedance, 'external'   to   the installation
is the measured resistance of the line conductor and circuit protective
conductor, measured during the continuity test method   I   or ring
circuit continuity test step   3.
For consumer units or distribution boards not   at   the origin, confusion can arise over
the   term   'external earth fault loop impedance' (Ze) and some prefer   to   write or   note
the earth fault loop impedance   at   the distribution board as Zab. As this value is   not
external to the installation, the formula is modified to:
Zs = Zeb (RI + R19
+
66
Guidance   note   3: Inspection and Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

.
l
.
.
l
.
.
l
.
.
l
.
.
l
.
.
l
.
Circuit-breakers and residual   current   devices
The test (measuring)   current   of earth fat'   1   Jp   impedance testers may trip some
types of 6 A Type B circuit-breakers   at   cp   protecting the circuit. So, this will
prevent a   measurement   being taken   at   d   II-ltily'   result in an unwanted disconnection of
supply   to   the circuit under test.
I   Ct-
I
Instrument   manufacturers can supply loop   testers   that are less liable   to   trip RCDs by
either limiting the   test   current (to less than   15   mA) or by DC biasing (this technique
saturates   the core of the RCD prior   to   applying the test).
s42.-4.2
643.13
Measurement of external earth fault loop impedance, Ze
The external earth l   loop impedance, Ze, is measured using an earth fault loop
impedance   tester   at   the origin of the installation. The impedance   measurement   is
made between the line conductor of the supply and the means of earthing with   the
morn switch open or with all the circuits isolated.   The means of earthing must be
disconnected from the installation MET for the duration of the test   to   remove parallel
paths. Care should be taken   to   avoid any shock hazard   to   the testing personnel and
other persons on the site both whilst establishing contact, and whilst performing the
test.
QLIT
ENSURE THAT THE EARTH CONNECTION HAS BEEN RECONNECTED BEFORE
THE INSTALLTION IS ENERGISED (OR RE-ENERGISED).
See Figure 2.10 for test method connections.
Instrument:   Use an earth fault loop impedance tester for this test   - see Section 4.5.
v   Figure 2.10   Example test of Ze   at   the origin of a small installation
main switch (open)
l
L
N
I
E
I
al
*
O O O
test instrument
As previously mentioned, the measured Ze can be used   to   add   to   circuit (R1 + RQ)
values.
Determining external earth fault loop impedance,   ze,   by enquiry
The external earth fault loop impedance, Ze, can be determined by enquiry   to   the
electricity distributor. However, if this is relied upon, a test must be made   to   ensure
that the distributor's earth terminal is actually connected with Earth, using an earth
fault loop impedance tester   to   verify that the intended means of earthing is present
and of the expected value or a   test   lamp.
67
I
I   I
©
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedtnology
ll
n   *

643.1
Verification of earth fault loop impedance test results
It is important   to   recognise that BS 7671 requires the inspector   not   only to test the
installation but also   to   compare the results with relevant design criteria (or with criteria
within BS 7671). This may seem obvious, but it is   not   uncommon for some inspectors
to   pass   test   information back   to   their office without making the necessary comparisons,
possibly assuming that the office or someone else will check the results, the office
might then assume that the inspector has checked the results against criteria, but no
one has!
Values of 25 should be compared with one of the following:
(a)
Table   41.2   (b)
Table 41.3
Table 41.4
(C)
(d)
for   standard   thermoplastic   (pvt)   circuits,   the   values   in   Appendix   A   of   this
Guidance Note
earth fault loop impedance figures provided by the designer. See also Appendix
A, which provides information on how   to correct   measured results for ambient
temperature   as this may not have been done by the designer (the inspector will
need   to   clarify this point)
tabulated   values   in   BS   7671,   corrected   for   temperature.   See   Appendix   A,
which provides information on how   to   correct measured results for ambient
temperature
using a factor of 0.8, see Appendix A2.
Appendix A provides a formula for making temperature adjustments, together with a
worked example.
643.7.3.201
434.1
2.6.17 Prospective fault   current,
'of
Regulation 434.1 requires the prospective fault current to be determined   at   every
relevant point of an installation for design purposes, and Regulation 643.7.3.201
requires that the prospective fault   current   under both short-circuit and earth fault
conditions, be measured, calculated or determined by another method,   at   the origin
and at other relevant points in the installation for confirmation.
Regulation 643.7.3.201 introduces the requirements of Regulation 434.1 into the
testing section, the designer being required   to   determine the prospective fault   current,
under both short-circuit and earth fault conditions,   at   every relevant point of   the
.   This may be done by calculation, be ascertained by enquiry or be
measured directly using an instrument (inspection). The expression 'every relevant
point' means every point where a protective device is required   to   operate under fault
conditions, and includes the origin of the installation. Appendix 14 provides some
further guidance on these requirements.
installation
The inspector   must   have knowledge of the design in this   respect   as, for example, if the
switchgear   at   the origin of an installation is suitably rated for prospective fault   current
and switchgear of similar short-circuit rating is used downstream of that point, then no
further checks are necessary. This is because the magnitude of the prospective fault
current   decreases with increasing distance downstream of the origin, assuming that
there is   not   another source of supply, such as a generator, connected   to   the installation
at   a point other than the main supply terminals of the installation. Any fault current
contribution from a generator must be included if the generator can operate in parallel
with the supply. If a generator or other source can supply the installation in place of
the normal supply generally fault   currents   will be significantly lower and the protection
may take longer   to   clear a fault making it possible that the 1st contribution could cause
thermal damage   to   some cables or equipment.
68
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology @~

434.5.1
Part I
Qd   l Regulation 434   I   requires that, except where back-up protection is provid   :>y
another device in accordance with the second paragraph of that regulation, the breaking
ty rating of each protective device shall be   not   less than the prospective fault
current at its point of installation. The   term   prospective fault   current   includes the
prospective short-circuit current and the prospective earth fault   current.   The maximum
prospective fault   current   at   the point of installation of a protective device is the greater
of these   two   prospective fault   currents   at   that point, which should be determined and
compared with the breaking capacity of the device.
capac
,   the maximum value   of the prospective short-circuit current
can be obtained by direct connection of the instrument between live conductors at
the protective device   at   the origin or other relevant location within the installation. Both
two-lead and three-lead instruments capable of determining prospective fault current
are available and it is important that any instrument being used is set on the correct
range and connected in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions for its use.
Failure   to   do so could be dangerous, could result in damage   to   the instrument and
might result in misleading readings being obtained.
With the power on
Instrument:   Use the prospective fault   current   range of a suitable earth fault loop
impedance   tester   for this   test   - see Section   .s   (final paragraph). 4
With some instruments, the voltage between line conductors   cannot   be measured
directly. Where this is the case, it can be assumed that for three-phase supplies
the maximum balanced prospective short-circuit level will be, as a rule of thumb,
approximately twice the single-phase value. This figure errs on the side of safety.
Where an instrument is rated for the higher voltage a more accurate prospective fault
current   measurement,   for a   3   phase installation, can be obtained by measuring the
line   to   line fault   current   and dividing the measured result by   0.87.
Prospective earth fault   current   may be obtained with the same instrument. Again, care
must   be taken   to   ensure that the instrument is   set   correctly and connected as per   t;he
manufacturer's instructions for use.
The values obtained should be compared with the breaking capacity of the appropriate
protective device. The brealdng capacity of the protective d   should be greater
than the highest value of prospective fault   current   obtained using the instrument.
device
Whichever is the greater of the prospective short-circuit   current   and the prospective
earth fault current obtained should be recorded on the Electrical Installation Certificate,
Electrical Installation Condition Report and the Schedule of Test Results as appropriate.
If the measured value of prospective fault   current   appears   to   exceed the fault current
rating for the equipment or protective dev   further consideration must be given to
the   current   limiting effect of any upstream protective devices and the ability for the
source of supply to deliver the indicated prospective fault   current.   The maximum value
of prospective fault   current   for an installation will be with the installation unloaded and
the conductors   at   ambient temperature.
ice
For a three-phase system, the prospective three-phase short-circuit   current
be larger than the single-phase line   to   neutral or earth fault currents.
will   always
69
.5.
'QI
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology

Note   on accuracy of earth fault loop impedance and prospective fault
current   testers   (see also Section 4.5)
Earth fault loop impedance   testers   become less   accurate   at low value impedance
readings, such as when measuring close   to   a transformer or other low impedance
source. lt   should be   noted that the   standard instrument   used for   determining
prospective fault   current   is effectively an earth fault loop impedance instrument.
Whilst earth fault loop testers should have a resolution of   at   least 0.01   Q   this should
not   be confused with accuracy.
Displayed   test   result less than about 0.1 Q, or about 1.0   Q   when on the lower   current
range (such as   15   mA),   could be prone   to   significant errors. So, such errors can
significantly affect the calculation of prospective fault current.
Should more   accurate   measurements   be needed on large installations with very low
impedance supplies specialist high   current   4 wire earth fault loop impedance   testers
are available.
Rated short-circuit breaking capacities of protective devices
The rated short-circuit capacities of fuses, circuit-breakers   to   BS EN 60898 and BS
3871 (now withdrawn) and RC80s   to   BS EN 61009 are shown in Table 2.8. Note
that BS 3871 identified the short-circuit capacity of circuit-breakers with an 'M' rating.
70
Guidance Note   3:   Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
I

v   Table 2.8   Rated short-circuit capacities of protective devices
Semi-enclosed fuse   to   BS 3036 with
allegory   of duty
51A   1
54A   4
System E (bolted) type
Iyster-(dp   n) type
80 kA   at   40O   V
so   kA at 230
80 kA at 400 V
Fuse system C
type l
type II
BS   88-6
16   kA
31.5 kA
16.5 at 240   v
80   at   415 V
Domestic fuse   to   BS 1361
16.
33.0 type   2
Ilrcult-breakers   to   BS 3871
(replaced by BS EN   60898)
M1   1
1.5
3
4.5
*
|
lm
the
the
M1
MY
M4.5
MY   6
M9   9
Two   short-circuit   capacity   ratings   are   defined   in   BS   EN   60898   and
BS   EN   61009:
rated short-circuit capacity (marked on the device)
service short-circuit capacity.
11
.5
'Qi
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology

The difference between the   two   short-circuit-ratings described above is the condition
of the circuit-breaker after manuiacturefs testing,
lm is the maximum fault   current   t:hat the device can interrupt safely, although its
characteristics may have been altered and it may no longer be usable.
IG is the maximum fault   current   that the device can interrupt safely without loss of
performance.
The lm value   IS   maned on the device in a   rectangle, for example,   6000 and   for the
majority   of   applications the prospective fault   current   at   the terminals of Me drcuit-
breaker should   not   exceed this value
For domestic installations the prospective fault   current   is unlikely   to   exceed   6   kA, up   to
which value lm will equal   1£$.   (For domestic installations the DNO may specify a higher
fault current value   -   perhaps up   to   16   kA   -   but this level is rapidly reduced through
the impedance of the supply cables.)
For switchgear, the relevant   fault   current (short-orcuit) rating of   the   switdlgear (or
assembly) should be equal   to   or exceed the maximum prospective fault   current   at   the
point of connection   to   the   system   For non-domestic installations on the   pLblic   supply
network this information will have   to   be obtained from the local DNO.
The terminology   to   define the short-cmcuit rating of an assembly   IS   g i n in the BS EN
61439 series of standards as follows:
(8)
(b)
(¢)
rated short-time withstand current lm
rated peak withstand current 'pa
rated conditional short-circuit current   lac-
Further details are   provided   in IET Guidance   now   2.
Where a   service   cut-out containing a cartridge fuse   to   BS 86-3 (formerly BS 1361)
supplies a consumer unit whidl complies with BS   5486-13   or BS EN   60439-3   Annex
ZA, then the short-circuit capacity of the   overcurrent   protective devices within consumer
units maybe taken   to   be   16   kg
Fault currents up   to   16   kA
Except in London and some other major city certes, the maximum   fault   current for
230   v   single-phase supplies up to   IOO   A   is   unlikely   to   exceed   16   kA.
The   short-circuit   capacity   of   overcunrent   protediw   devices   incorporated   within
consumer units may be taken   to   be   16   kA Meme:
(a) the consumer unit complies with BS EN   61439-3:2012
(b) the consumer unit is supplied through a type II fuse   to   BS 136I:l971   rated   at
not   more than   100   A, on a single-phase supply with a nominal voltage up   to
250   v
Recording the prospective fault current
Both the   Electrical Installation Certificate and the Electrical Installation Condition
Report contain a section headed Nature of Supply Parameters, which requires the
prospective fault   current at   the origin   to   be recorded The   value   to   be recorded is the
greater of either the short circuit   current   (between live conductors) or the earth fault
12
Guidance Home   3:   Inspection and Testing
c The llrslituliond Engineering md Tednology

current   (between line conductor(s) and the main earthing terminal). If it is considered
necessary   to   record values   at   other relevant points, they can be recorded on the
Schedule of Test Results. Where the protective   used at the origin have the
necessary rated breaking capacity, and devices with similar breaking capacity are used
throughout the installation,   at   can be assumed that the Regulations are satisfied in this
respect   for all distribution boards (provided there is   not   another source of supply, such
as a   generator,   connected   to   the installation   at   a point other than the main supply
terminals of the installation).
devices
2.6.18 Phase sequence testing
643.9   Regulation 643.9 verification that the phase sequence is maintained for multiphase
circuits within an installation.   In   practice, this will be achieved by checking polarity
and connections throughout the installation. Whilst the Regulation requires phase
sequence   to   be maintained throughout the installation this should   not   be confused
with phase rotation.
Phase   sequence   may   be   confirmed,   with   the   installation/circuits   isolated   using
continuity testing as carried   out   for continuity of conductors. This may be carried out
using the same method   as   R1 + R2 testing.
v   Figure 2.11   All pos5lbllltle5 of swapping any   two   wires
Original 1-2-3
phase rotation   (wires   1 and 2 swapped)
phase rotation   =   2-1   -3
End result
2
r
1
2
3
1
3
{wires   2 and   3   swapped)
phase rotation = 1-3-2
1
2
3
1
3
2
{wires   I   and 3 swapped]
phase   rotas-on =   3-2-1
1
2
3
3
2
1
Optionally and occasionally, the inspector may wish   to   check phase sequence by using
a phase rotation tester, either:
rotating disc type, or
indicator lamp type.
(a)
(b)
Instruments containing both of the above forms of indication are also available.
Various   types   exist, a rotating disc, an electronic LCD equivalent or other means of
indication. Generally, coloured or labelled leads are connected   to   the installation and if
the phase sequence/rotation is correct the indication confirms this.
I L l
r
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
73

In the case of a rotating disc type instrument, the disc will be rotating eidler clockwise
or anticlockwise.
Some Approved Voltage Testers have a phase notation facility built in   to   them. They
offer an increase in sailer over standard   3   wire phase rotation testers as they do   not
require the   inspector   to attach the wires   to   the installation as they only require 2
phases   to   be probed with the hand held probes.
Wrth   the indicator   lamp   type either the LI/L2/L3   (fomlerly R/Y/B)   lamp   or the LED/
L2   (formerly R/B/Y)   lamp will be   illuminated.
Both   types   of phase sequence indicator can also be used   to   verify phase sequence/
direction of rotation at the supply terminals   to   motors and to confirm the   correct
labellinghdentification of plain conductors.
2.6.19 Operation and functional testing of RCDs
The operating times of RCDs are required   to   be tested   in   the following   circumstances:
643.7   (a)   where they are   relied   on for disconnection for compliance with Chapter   41
643.8   (b) where they are installed as additional protection as specified in Chapter 41.
Where RCDs are installed with circuit-breakers and the clraJit has the dtaracteistics
to satisfy Chapter 41 without the RCD, then testing d the RCD is   not   essential unless
it is specified for additional protection. (As noted previously, such specification details
must   be provided   to   the inspector before the   Starr   of the inspection and testing world)
74
Guidance   Mote   3: Inspection and Testing
c The lllslituliond Engineering md Tednalogy
.1

Operation of residual current devices
411.4.5   For ead'l of the   tests,   readings should be taken on both positive and negative   half-
m.s.3   cycles and the longer operating time recorded.
Prior   to   these RED   tests   ii* is essential, for safety reasons, that the earth fault loop
Impedance is tested   to   check the requirements have been   met.
Instrument Use an RCD   tester   for these   tests,   see Section   4.7.
Test method
The   test   IS   made   on the load side   of the RCD   between   the line   conductor of the protected
circuit and the associated cpc. The load should be disconnected during the test These
tests can result in a potentially dangerous voltage on exposed-conductive-parts and
extraneous-conductive-parts when the earth fault loop impedance approadles the
maximum acceptable limits. Precautions must therefore be taken to prevent contact
of persons or livestock with sud'l parts.
m.4.s   The operating time should be no greater than those stated in Table   41.1   (Regulation
41 l.4.5) for final orcuits and 5 seconds for distribution circuits unless supplementary
bonding has been apdied in accordance with Regulation   419.3.
v   Table 2.9   Operational   tripping   times for   various RCDs
BS 4293   200   {(O5   ID   l.0)xt1rrEdday}+2OO
B
7288
S 61009 (RCBO)   300   ISO   to
on
$00   swpe
4ls.1
643.7
Additional protection
Where an RCD with a rated residual operating   current,
'Am
not   exceeding 30 mA is
used   to   provide additional protection in the   event   of failure of basic protection and/u
failure of the provision   for   fault protection or carelessness by users, the operating time
of the device   must   not   exceed   40   ms   at   a test   current   of   5   1An- The maximum   test
time should   not   exceed 40 ms, unless the protective conductor potential rises by less
than so V. (The instrument supplier will advise on compliance.)
643.10
Integral   test   device
An   integral   test   device is incorporated in eadl RCD. This device enables the functioning
of the medwanical parts of the RCD to be verified by pressing the button marked 'T'
or 'Test'.
Opefation of the integral   test   device does   provide a   means   of checking. not
(a) the continuity of the earthing conductor or   the   associated circuit protiedive
conductors,   Of
(b) any earth electrode or other   M'EBTlS   of earthing, or
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
o The lraslinldon Cd Engheeriq and ledmology
75

(c)
(d)
any other part of the associated installation earthing, or
the sensitivity of the device.
The RCD   test   button will only   operate   the RCD if it is energized.
2.6.20 Other functional testing
643.10   Other   equipment,   including switchgear,   controls   and   interlocks,   should   also   be
functionally tested   - that is, operated   to   confirm that they work and are properly
installed, mounted and adjusted.
The settings on all adjustable relays and controls etc should be checked   to   see that
they align with the designers proposed requirements. RCD   test   buttons should be
operated   to   see that the   RCD   trips.
Arc;   fault detection devices (AFDDS) have been introduced in the 18th edition of
BS 7671 (532.6). There are   two   general types   - some have a   test   button and the
others do   not.   Functional testing can only be carried   out   by pressing the test button,
there is no means of functionally testing the other type.
Circuit breakers should   not   be used as lighting switches on a regular basis (as in some
warehouses) unless they are approved by the manufacturers for such use.
2.6.21   Verification of voltage drop
Verification of voltage drop is not normally required during initial verification and it is
usually sufficient   to   check that voltage drop calculations have been undertaken and the
design voltage drops are within the limits required in BS 7671.
643.11
Sect 525
Where it may be necessary   to   verify that voltage drop does   not   exceed the limits stated
in relevant product standards of installed equipment, BS   7671   provides guidance   to   do
so. Where no such limits are stated, voltage drop should be such that it does   not   impair
the proper and safe functioning of installed equipment.
Voltage drop problems are quite rare but the inspector should be aware that long
runs of circuit conductors and/or high   currents   can sometimes cause voltage drop
problems.
Accurate measurement of voltage drop within an installation is   not   practical as this
would mean measuring the instantaneous voltage   at   both the origin and   at   the point of
interest simultaneously, together with the instantaneous load current. An indication of
volt drop can be obtained   to   ensure that it is   not   excessive for the proper functioning
of the equipment by simple voltage   measurement   at   the equipment terminals with
the installation fully loaded.
Voltage drop may be determined by   measurement   of the combined live conductor
resistance and calculation using this value and the full load   current   of the equipment
with compensation for conductor temperature difference for measured and operating
conductor values. This will determine voltage drop within the circuit, which can then
be used   to   verify compliance.
Table 4Ab   Appendix   4   of BS 7671 gives maximum values of voltage drop for lighting and for other
uses, depending upon whether the installation is supplied directly from a public LV
distribution system or from a private LV supply.
76
Guidance   Note   3:   Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology Q

It should be remembered that voltage drop may exceed the values stated in Appendix   4
in situations such as   motor   starting periods and where equipment has a high inrush
current   where sudl events remain within the limits specified in the relevant product
standard or reasonable recommendation by a manufacturer.
2.6.22   Verification in medical locations
Sect   710   The installation and testing of installations in medical locations is very much a specialist
71a64   area and only the general requirements of BS 7671 are covered in this Guidance Note.
Initial verification   is   carried   out   by an inspection and functional   tests   of the isolation IT
system equipment including the insulation motoring devices. Testing is required   to
measure the leakage   current   of the output circuit of medical IT isolating transformers
and   measurement   d the resistance of the supplementary equipotential bonding.
2.6.23   Verification off protection of low voltage installations against
temporary overvoltages due   to   faults in the high voltage or
low voltage system
Sect   442   The protection referred to in this section of the Guidance Note   IS   the subject of
GN1   Section 442   of BS 7671.   For more information, see   IET Guidance Note I.
uma   Temporary ovenroltages due   to   a high voltage system fault
4412.2   Regulations 442.21 and 4422.2 give the requirements concerning the magnitude and
duration of temporary overvoltages occurring due   to   a fault in the HV   system   (typically
II   kv) supplying the substation from which the low voltage installation is supplied.
442.13   Regulation 442.23 points out that the requirements of Regulations 442.2.1 and
442.2.2 are deemed   to   be   met   if the low voltage installation is supplied from a system
for distribution of electricity   to   the public This assumes that the public dectridty
supply distribution system is appropriately designed and constructed, as is the case
in Great Britain. Where this is the case, there is no need for the inspector   to   dleck
compliance with Regulations 442.21 and 442.2.2.
4412.1
4421.2
Where the low voltage installation is   supplied from a privately-owned substation, the
design responsibility for complying with Regulations 442.2.1 and 442.2.2 rests with
the designer(s) of the substation and the associated low voltage distribution network
up   to   the incoming terminals of the low voltage installation. The inspector   will   need   to
be in possession   of   sufficient information provided by this   party   (or parties)   about   the
intended means compliance,   to   enable him or her   to   verify, so far as is reasonably
practicable, that these means have been properly   put   into effect Matters   to   be decked
by the inspector include:
(a) that the high voltage and low voltage earthing arrangements of the substation have
been   correctly installed and   that thdr   resistances to Earth   meet   the designes
requirements
(b)   that the high voltage earthing and low voltage arrangements are interconnected
or, where appropriate, separated, according   to   the designer's requirements
(c)   that any global earthing   system   or additional connections with Earth in the LV
network Mat are relied on for safety are in existence and properly installed, and
that the resistance of connections with Earth   meets   the designer's requirements
(d)   that the rated currents and settings of protective devices are as intended by the
designer.
Gudanoe um   3:   Inspection and Testing
4:   The lnslinudon d Engineering and Technology
77

Temporary overvoltages due   to   a low voltage system fault
442.3
442.4
442.5
Regulations 442.3,   442.4   and 442.5 require consideration   to   be given to the   stress
voltages that would occur in an installation in the   event   of loss of the neutral conductor
in a TN or TT system, an earth fault in an IT   system   with distributed neutral, or a short-
circuit between a line conductor and a neutral conductor.
In practice there is usually little that installation designer and   constructor   can do   to meet
the requirements of these regulations beyond selecting and installing equipment with
appropriate insulation voltage ratings, such as 600/1000   V cables for an installation
of nominal voltage 230/400   v.   The inspector should check that this has been done.
2.6.24   Verification of protection against overvoltages of atmospheric
origin or due   to   switching
Section 443
GN1
The protection referred   to   in this section of the guidance   note   is the subject of
Section 443 of BS 7671. For more information, see IET Guidance Note   1.
Table   443.2   Irrespective of whether the electrical d   her   has chosen   to   specify surge protective
devices (SPDs), the inspector should check that all electrical equipment of the
installation has been so selected and installed that, according   to   its product standards,
it provides   at   least the applicable value of rated impulse voltage referred   to   in Table
443.2   of BS 7671. The values of rated impulse withstand voltage that table are given
according   to   which Category, I, II, 111 or   iv,   the equipment falls into and according   to
the nominal voltage of the installation. Table 443.2 of BS T671 gives examples of
equipment falling into each of the categories.
psig
4431.1
Section   534
Where protection against overvoltage   by the use of SPDs has been specified by the
designer, the inspector should check that they have been selected and installed in
accordance   with   the   designer's   requirements   or   otherwise   in   accordance   with
Section 534 of BS 7671.
The inspector needs   to   verify that   SPDs   have   not   become expired or defective by
ensuring that indicator lights are correctly illuminated or the coloured flag or flags on
the device indicate they are serviceable.
2.6.25   Verification of measures against electromagnetic
disturbances
Sect 444
GNI
Inspectors should familiarise themselves with the section on avoidance and reduction
of electromagnetic disturbances, Section   444   of BS 7671. For more information, see
IET Guidance Note 1.
It should be noted that compliance with EMC requirements in BS 7671 and   in The
Electromagnetic Compotrbility Regulations   2016 is something that is   not verified
by testing. The ethos of achieving electromagnetic compatibility is in design (with
possibly some of the mitigating effects) and product conformity, along with good
installation practice, This is shown by way of storing information on the design criteria.
The information that would need to be retained for the "design file" (which needs   to
be retained by the "responsible person", which under the   2016   EMC Regulations is the
Installer) might include:
to)
For a small or simple installations consisting solely of CE-marked equipment
complying with the EMC Regulations 2016:
78
Guidance   note   3:   Inspection and Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

(i)   Product manuals and installation instructions   -   and   evidence of   CE   marking
of products.
(ii)   Notes on what was done whens instructions could   not   be fdlorwed (if
relevant).
(b) For a large or complex installation, or where the above does   not   apply:
(i)   Manufacturer/importer declarations of conformity,   or   statements   of EMC
standards compliance   etc.
(ii)   Cable and product manufacturer's installation instructions and specifications
(iii)   Design drawings and reports demonstrating:
•   design   conformity   to   relevant   installation   standards,   whidl   might
include:
-
BS 7671
-   BS EN 50310
-   BS EN   50174   series
-,   BS IEC   6lOOO~5-2
-   Etc   (for   systems   sudl   as emergency lighting, fire alarm and so
on that may have additional EMC requirements as   part   of their
system standards)
Evidence   t;hat   manufacturer   instructions   have   been   followed,   or
mitigation measures where they could   not   be-
Product selection relevant for the EM environment (see PD IEC/TR
6100O-2- 5)
-   For   larger   installations   /   multi-use   premises,   EM   ernrironment
zoning
-
Statement of mitigations and residual risk for equipment installed
outside target EM   environment
Section   444   specifies additional mitigating   methods for EMC applied   to   the design and
installation of cables and equipment. Many of these mitigating methods concern the
routing   of cables and then   distance from other cables, as well as providing   equipotential
bonding
Thus, verification of EMC and compliance with Section 444 is as follows:
(a) chedcing the EMC design has been followed with respect   to   cable routing,
separation distances, enclosure   etc.
(b) inspection   of   cable   sheath   and   screen   terminations   and,   if   considered
necessary, continuity d'lecking of these items
(c)   carrying   out   continuity chedts of   any   additional mitigating bonding network
provided (for examde, a local mesh network).
BS IEC 61000-5-2 contains guidance on inspection items for good installation practices
to   achieve EMC. BS   EN   5031012016 contains requirements for dectncal   tests   to   be
carried   out   for bonding networks in buildings containing information technology and
telecommunications   systems.
It should be noted that there are no specific requirements in BS 7671 for either installers
or inspectors to carry out electric field or magnetic field strength measurements,
however, designs for certain installations may require such   measurements   to   be made,
based on   assessments   carried   out   at   the design   stage.
Guidance Nate 3: Inspection and Testing
o The lnslinudon d Engineering and Technology
79

80
Gudanne Home   3:   Inspection and RIesling
c   m   lnslitulim d   www; and   ndn0a0gy

3.1   Purpose of periodic inspection and   testing
651.1   The purpose of periodic inspection and testing is   to   provide an engineering view on
whether or   not   the installation is in a satisfactory condition where it can continue to
be used safely.
A detailed visual examination of the installation is required, together with appropriate
tests. The tests are mainly   to   confirm that the disconnection times stated in Chapter   41
are met.
The periodic inspection and testing is carried
for:
out,   so far as   is reasonably practicable,
(I)
(b)
(c)
(d)
the safety of persons and livestock against the effects of electric shock and burns,
protection against damage   to   property   by fire and heat arising from an installation
defect;
confirmation that the installation is   not   damaged or deteriorated so as to impair
safety, and
the identification of installation defects and departures from the requirements
of BS   7671   that may give rise   to   danger.
652.2   For an installation under effective supervision in normal use, periodic: inspection
and testing may be replaced by an adequate regime of continuous monitoring and
maintenance of the installation and all its constituent equipment by skilled persons
competent   in such work.   It   is important in such regimes that maintenance records, with
references   to   inspection and testing, are recorded and stored. Such records should
be available for scrutiny and need   not   be in the standard   IET   Electrical Installation
Condition Report format.
3.2   Necessity for periodic inspection and testing
Periodicinspectiorr and testing is necessary because all electrical installations deteriorate
due to a number of factors such as damage, wear,   tear,   corrosion, excessive electrical
loading, ageing and environmental influences. Consequently:
(a)
legislation requires that electrical installations   are   maintained in a safe condition,
and this lends itself to periodic inspection and testing   -   see also Tables 3.1 and
3.2
licensing authorities, public bodies, insurance companies, mortgage lenders and
(b)
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
81

others may   require   periodic inspection and testing of dectncal installations, as is
for example the case for houses in multiple occupation   -   see Tables   3.1   and   3.2
(c) additionally, periodic inspection and testing should be considered in the following
circumstances:
(i)   to   assess compliance with BS   767 I
(ii)   on a change of occupancy of the premises (especially rented domestic
accommodation)
(iii)   on a dlange of use of die premises
(iv)   after additions   or   alterations to the original installation
(v)   where there is a significant change (increase)   in   the electrical loading of t:he
installation
(vi)   where there is reason   to   believe that damage may have been caused   to
de installation, as might be the case for example after flooding.
'Reference to legislation and other documents   IS   made below and it is vital that these
requirements are ascertained before undertaking periodic inspection and testing."
3.3   Electrldty   at Work Regulations
Regulation 4(2)   of the   Electricity   at   WM Regulations /989 requires that:
As may be necessary   to   prevent   danger, all   systems   shall be maintained so as   to
prevent, so far as is reasonably practicable such danger.
Guidance   on The Eledrrdty   at   Wonk Regulations   I989(HSR25), published by the
Health and Safety Executive, advises that this regulation is concerned with the need
for maintenance   to   ensure the safety of the system rather than bang concerned with
the   activity of doing the maintenance in a sate manner, which   is   required by Regulation
4(3). The obligation   to   maintain a   system   arises if danger would otherwise result.
There   B   no specific requirement to carry   out   a maintenance activity as such, what is
required   IS   that the   system   be kept in a safe condition The frequency and   nature   of
the maintenance must be sudl as   to   prevent   danger so far as is reasonably practicable.
There have been many debates as   to   what "reasonably practicable' means, and
eventually alter an accident a   court   would have to decide the issues. However in
essence, making sure a risk has been reduced as low as reasonably practicable is
about weighing the risk against the sacrifice needed   to   further reduce it. The decision
should be weighted in favour of health and safety because Me   presumption   is that
the duty-hoider should implement the risk reduction measure. To avoid having   to
make this sacrifice the duty-holder   must   be able to show that it would be grossly
disproportionate   to   the benefits of risk reduction that would be achieved. Thus, the
process   E   not   one of balancing the   costs   and benefits of measures but, rather, of
adopting measures   except whee they are ruled   out   because they   involve grossly
disproportionate sacrifices.
Ultimately under the Electricity   at   Work Regulations it is the duty holder who is
responsible for the safety of an electrical installation   at   work and this leads   to   Me
question of who   is   the duty holder.   In   the instance of HSWA,   s.4,   it refers   to   a person
'who has,   to   any extent, control of premises", who may be an identified person with
that specific responsibility within an organisation   -   a landlord, or perhaps a manager
or supervisor.
Regular inspection of equipment including the electrical installation is an essential   part
of any preventive maintenance programme. This regular inspection may be carried
az
Guidance Home   3:   Inspection and Testing
c The lllnslituliond Engineuingmd Tednology

out   as required without dismantling (or with partial dismantling, as required) and
supplemented by appropriate testing.
There is no specific requirementtotestthe installation on every inspection. Where testing
requires dismantling, the inspector should consider whether the risks associated with
dismantling and reassembling are justified. Dismantling, and particularly disconnection
of cables or components, introduces a risk of unsatisfactory reassembly.
lt is however easy   to   decide that it is impractical   to   dismantle an item of equipment
or that it would introduce a risk of unsatisfactory reassembly but this needs   to   be
considered against the possible later electrical dangers of not doing so, (for example,
inspecting inside switchgear for signs of overheating). Where irreparable damage would
ensue it can be justified   not   to inspect (for example, lifting floor tiles   to   inspect cables
under a floor) but where it is just a   matter   of a little   extra   work or inconvenience (for
example, a visual inspection of cables   etc   in a domestic dwelling loft void) it could be
difficult   to   justify.
3.4   Design
341.1   When carrying   out   the design of an installation and particularly when specifying the
equipment, the designer should take into   account   the quality of the maintenance   to
be reasonably expected, including the frequency of routine checks and the period
between subsequent inspections (supplemented as necessary by testing).
Information   on   the   requirements for   routine checks   and inspections should be
provided in accordance with Section   6 of the Health and Safety   or   Work   etc.   Act
1974 and as required   by the Construction (Design and Monogemernj Regulations
2015. Duty holders and users of premises should seek this information as the basis
on which   to   make their own assessments. The Health and Safety Executive advise
in their guidance on   The Electricity   of   Work   Regulations   rs~89(HsR2s), that practical
experience of an installation's use may indicate the need for an adjustment   to   the
frequency of checks and inspections. This is a   matter   of judgment for the duty holder.
In fact,   as   7671 requires the designer of an electrical installation   to   recommend the
interval   to   the first periodic inspection and insert the date of that recommendation
on the Electrical Installation Certificate. However, as stated in regulation 341.1 wider
consideration should be given   to   the expected maintainability of an installation and the
client should be involved, and perhaps the installer too, so any designer would take the
advice of other relevant persons into   account.   Then, after the first, and further periodic
inspections and tests, the inspector, in conjunction with the client, taking into account
test results and the observations found, will then advise on the period until the   next
inspection. However, whatever inspection and testing periods are decided upon must
be justifiable as they may be requested   to   be justified in the case of an accident   etc.   It
would   not   be unreasonable for the inspector   to   write supporting reasons for the period
that has been advised on   to   the inspection and test report.
3.5   Routine checks
Electrical installations should   not   be left without any attention for the periods of years
that are normally allowed between formal inspections.   In   domestic premises it is
presumed that the occupier will soon notice any breakages or excessive wear and
arrange for precautions   to   be taken and repairs   to   be carried   out.
Commercial and industrial installations come under the   Electricity   at   Work   Regulations
1989 and formal arrangements are required for maintenance and interim routine
Guidance Note   3:   Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
83

checks (as well as periodic inspections), there should also be facilities   to   receive wear-
and-tear reports from users of the premises.
The frequency and type of these routine checks will depend entirely upon the   nature
of the premises and should be   set   by the electrical duty holder. Routine checks should
include the items listed in Table 3.1. Table   3.2   (Section 3.7) provides guidance on the
frequency   r   which may need   to   be increased as an installation ages.
v   Table 3.1   Routine   checks
spection   Look for
breakag
wear/deterioration
signs of overheating
missing parts (covers, screws)
loose fixings
Confirm
switchgear accessible (not obstructed)
doors Of enclosures secure
adequate labeling in place
Note   that routine checks need   not   be carried   out   by an electrically skilled person but
should be undertaken by somebody who is able   to   safely use the installation and
recognise defects.
There is a general on-going requirement   to   manage health and safety at work, and
electrical safety is just one area. To ensure that regular routine checks are made on the
electrical installation it may be advantageous in larger premises   to   combine these with
other regular checks such as emergency lighting and fire alarm inspections, general fire
safety inspections, emergency exit route inspections   etc   on security patrols. All results
should be noted on a simple form and filed for any future reference.
3.6   Required information
It   is essential that the inspector knows and agrees with the client the extent of the
installation   to   be inspected and any criteria regarding the limit of the inspection. This
should be recorded.
514.9   Enquiries should be made to the person responsible for the electrical installation with
regard   to   the provision of diagrams, design criteria, type of electricity supply (and any
alternative supply) and earthing   arrangements.
Where they exist, diagrams, charts or tables should be available   to   indicate the   type   and
composition of circuits, identification of protective devices for shock protection, isolation
and switching and a description of the method used for fault protection. Unfortunately
most such records are   not   kept up   to   date with changes and additions/removals and
an inspector will initially need   to   verify the accuracy of any such information provided.
84
Guidance note   3:   Inspection and Testing
o   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

Where there are no records, in all but the simplest domestic installation an inspector
may first need   to   spend time tracing installation systems and circuits and producing
basic drawings and schedules before starting any inspection and testing work.
3.1   Frequency of periodic inspections
The time intervals between the recommended dates of periodic inspections and
testing require careful consideration. The date for the first periodic inspection and test
is required   to   be considered and recommended by the installation designer, based on
their design philosophy and maintenance advice from other parties (Regulation s41.r).
The period for each subsequent periodic inspection is required   to   be considered and
recommended by a   competent   inspector as   part   of carrying out a periodic inspection
and   test.
652.1   In advising a dutyholderaboutthe time interval for the period for the next recommended
periodic inspection and test, the inspector is required   to   take into consideration the
individual characteristics of the type of installation and equipment, its condition, use
and operation, any damage and deterioration, any known maintenance and the external
influences   to   which it is subjected. The results and recommendations of any previous
periodic inspection   reports   should also be considered.
Typical installation types with   suggested initial frequencies for   the   first periodic
inspection and testing are provided in Table   3.2.   The table   sets   out a suggested initial
frequency for the various routine checks on electrical installations and equipment. It
gives suggested starting intervals for a duty holder   to   consider when implementing a
maintenance plan for a particular installation. lt   must   be remembered that "routine
checks" and "periodic inspection and testing" by a competent inspector are only a part
of the requirement for maintenance and the duty holder has a continuing on-going
responsibility for the safety of an installation
Note'   Duty folders are reminded of the requirements of Regulation 4(2) of The Electricity   at
Work Regulations, 1989 - undertaking routine inspection and testing of their installations
will assist in meeting this duty.
The suggested initial frequencies for inspection and testing given in Table 3.2 are
recommendations and not legal requirements. It is the dutyholders responsibility   to
determine when the   next   periodic inspection is undertaken. Dutyholders should take
appropriate advice from specialists where necessary,   to   assess the conditions affecting
their installation which may lead   to   defects, potential damage and/or deterioration
that will affect safety when making this decision. Such advice may include routine
checks, manufacturers' or engineers' advice and guidance, periodic inspection and
testing reports etc, and this information should assist the dutyholder   to   determine
the maintenance plan for their installation. Over time, and with practical maintenance
experience, it may be possible   to   extend periodic inspection and testing intervals if
results of routine checks, inspections or   tests   show that few faults are found and the
installation is   not   subject   to   excessive deterioration.   However,   if faults are common it
may be necessary   to   reduce intervals or take other action   to   improve maintenance
and reduce risk. Routine checks and periodic inspection and testing by a   competent
inspector are only a part of the requirement for maintenance and the duty holder has
a continuing on-going responsibility for the safety of an installation.
The   competent   inspector   carrying   out   subsequent   periodic   inspections   may
recommend that the interval   to   the   next   inspection be increased or decreased as
85
1
1
Guidance   Note   3:   Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology

a result of the findings of their   current   inspection. For example, the inspector may
recommend an interval greater in instances where an installation has   not   suffered from
damage or deterioration which would detract from its overall suitability for continued
use. Conversely, it would be appropriate   to   recommend that the   next   inspection is
carried   out   sooner where an installation has clearly not withstood the adverse effects
of its environment and usage well and is not subject   to   adequate and appropriate
maintenance.
In   short, the inspector, being a skilled person, should apply sound engineering
judgment and experience when deciding upon intervals between inspecting and
testing an installation based upon the criteria in Regulation 652 of BS 7671. It   must
also be noted that in the   event   of an accident or dangerous occurrence, the inspector
may be required   to   justify their decision.
In   the case of domestic and commercial premises, a change in occupancy of the
premises may necessitate additional inspection and testing.
65I _'|   The formal periodic inspection and testing should be carried out in accordance with
Regulation 642 supplemented by   tests   as detailed in Regulation 643. This requires an
inspection comprising a detailed examination of the installation, carried   out   without
dismantling or with partial dismantling as required, together with the appropriate tests
of Regulation 643 as required to comply with Regulation 651
652.2   Where there is an effective management   system   in place for inspection and preventative
maintenance of the installation (for example where there are competent permanent
on-site maintenance staff) periodic inspection and testing can be replaced by an
adequate regime of continuous monitoring and maintenance of the installation and its
constituent equipment. However appropriate records must be maintained on   site   to
show that an inspection and preventative maintenance plan is in place and is being
adhered   to.
Although periodic inspection and testing is primarily aimed   at   keeping an electrical
installation in a safe   state   it can also have other final   I benefits such as identifying
possible upcoming equipment failures that could interrupt production, providing advice
on energy saving and reducing running   costs.   lt must also be noted that whilst this
Guidance Note is concerned with periodic inspection and testing for the maintenance
of safety of general electrical installations there are other specialist parts of an electrical
installation such as plant controls, fire alarms and emergency lighting that also require
separate   periodic inspection and testing by specialists for the maintenance of safety.
Mia
86
Guidance note   3:   Inspection and Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology
.2.

v   Table 3.2   Recommended initial frequencies of inspection of electrical installations
Domestic accommodation
general
Domestic accommodation
rented houses and flats
I year
Residential accommodation
(Houses of Multiple Occupation)
halls of residence. nurses
accommodation. etc
1   year
Change Of
occupancy/10 years
Change of
occupancy/5 years
Change of
occupancy/5 years
Commercial   I   year   Change of
occupancy/5 years
vocational establishments
dustrial
6 months
1   year
I   year
I year
5 years
8;   years
5 years
5 years
Laboratories
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
87

Notes:
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
8
g
10
11
Particuar attention must be taken   to   comply with   Electricity Safety, Quality and
Continuity Regulations   (as amended).
Electricity at Work Regulations 1939, Regulation 4 and Memorandum of guidance
(HSR25) published by the HSE.
See BS 5266-1:2016   Emergency lighting. Code of   practice   for the emergency
escape lighting of premises.
Other intervals are recommended for testing operation of batteries and generators.
See BS 5839-1:2017   Fire detection and fire alarm   systems   for buildings. Code of
practice for design, installation, commissioning and maintenance of systems   in
non-domestic premises.
Local Authority Conditions of Licence.
It is recommended that a caravan is inspected and tested every three years,
reduced   to   every year if it is used frequently (see Regulation 721.514.1 and Fig
721 - Instructions for electricity supply).
The person carrying   out   subsequent inspections may recommend that the interval
between future inspections be increased or decreased as a result of the findings
of their inspection.
Medical locations shall have their isolating transformer equipment inspected and
tested for functionality as well as alarms   etc.,   every third year the output leakage
current   of the IT isolating equipment shall be measured.
The Landlord   &   Tenant Act 1985 requires that properties under the Act have their
services maintained. Periodic inspection and testing is the IET recognised method
of demonstrating this.
The   Management of Houses in Multiple Occupation(England)RegulatrOns and the
Management of Houses in Multiple Occupation (Wales) Regulations.
Any landlord (House in Multiple Occupation (HMO) or other occupancy) may be
considered   to   have duties under the   Electricity   at   Work Regulations   due   to   their
responsibilities under Section   3   of the Health   &   Safety   at   Work Act (for example
the common areas of a   set   of flats).   In   Scotland the private rented   sector   has legal
requirements   to   maintain the electrical installation. Landlords are required by law to
ensure that the electrical installation in a rented   property   is safe when tenants move
in and maintained in a safe condition throughout its duration and that a HMO has a
periodic inspection carried   out   on the   property   every five years.
(The definition of a HMO is difficult but it hinges on whether the persons living in the
house are related -   as   in   a   large family residence - or completely separate as in   a
block of flats.)
3.8   Requirements for periodic inspection and testing
3.8.1   Scope
The purpose of periodic inspection and testing is   to   provide an engineering view on
whether or   not   the installation is in a satisfactory condition where it can continue   to
be used in a safe way.
The periodic inspection and test comprises a detailed examination of the installation
together with appropriate tests. The inspection is carried   out   without taking apart or
dismantling equipment as far as is possible. The tests made are mainly   to   confirm that
the disconnection times stated in Chapter   41   are met, as well as highlighting other
defects.
88
Guidance note   3:   Inspection and Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

It is important that the competency of the skilled person carrying   out   the periodic
inspection and test is of the appropriate level, having   gained sufficient education, training
or practical skills, and knowledge   to   be fully   conversant   with the type of installation
being inspected and the   aspects   required of carrying   out   such an important inspection.
The inspector will, for example, need   to   be able   to   inspect switchgear, determine the
age of installation   components   and recognise signs of their deterioration. As well as
having sufficient visual inspection skills, they will also need   to   possess good testing
skills and experience of older installations and knowledge of what the resulting data
means in the   context   of the ongoing safety of the installation.
651.2   The requirement of BS 7671 for periodic inspection and testing is for a detailed
inspection comprising an examination of the installation without dismantling, or with
partial dismantling as required, together with the tests of Chapter   64   considered
appropriate by the person carrying out the inspection and testing. The scope of the
periodic inspection and testing   must   be decided by a suitably skilled person,   competent
in such inspection and testing work, taking into   account   the information and guidance
contained in this section.
3.8.2   Process -   prior to carrying out inspection and testing
Prior to carrying   out   the inspection, the inspector will need to meet with the client or
the client's representative   to   agree the scope and   nature   of the work required and the
programme and to highlight likely items that require isolation.
Consultation   with   the   client   or   the   client's   representative prior   to   the periodic
inspection and testing work being carried   out   is essential   to   determine the access and
any disruption   to   the normal work in the premises, health and safety requirements
(dangerous processes may be being carried out), security and access requirements and
fire safety requirements, as well as the degree of electrical disconnection which will
be acceptable before planning the detailed inspection and testing. To assist with this
planning any existing drawings, schedules and documentation of the installation should
be available, and some initial validation of these will be necessary. Also, the   extent   of
previous maintenance, routine tests and documentation, including the original design
and Electrical Installation Certificate and Certificates for any other electrical works that
have been carried   out   in the premises, should be provided   to   the inspector if they are
available.
For safety, it is necessary   to   carry   out   a visual inspection of the installation before
testing or opening enclosures, removing covers,   etc.   So far as is reasonably practicable,
the visual inspection must verify that the safety of persons, livestock and   property   is
not endangered.
3.8.3   General procedure
Note:   The following advice is   not   applicable   to   domestic or simple installations as the
extent   and method of inspection and testing is rudimentary in such installations in
comparison with more complex installations.
Although there are various approaches   to   carrying   out   inspection and testing, one
suggested method is   to   first obtain an overview of the installation, ideally from
diagrams and charts as well as from a simple 'walk round' survey prior   to   starting the
full inspection. This will enable the inspector   to   be able to plan the inspection and
identify items that require isolation   etc.   Most importantly, this initial survey will enable
the inspector   to   set sample sizes, see Section 3.8.4.
Guidance   Note   3:   Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
89

I
I   Where diagrams, charts or tables are   not   available, a degree of exploratory work may
be necessary so that inspection and testing can be carried   out   safely and effectively,
this may include a survey   to   identify switchgear, controlgear and the circuits they
control,
Indeed, for more involved installations without diagrams or charts the client should
be advised that such diagrams require producing prior   to   the inspection and testing
commencing.   Alternatively, the   inspection   can   commence   in   cases   where the
inspector considers that it is safe   to   proceed (this may be limited   to   visual inspection),
the production of diagrams and charts can be called for on the Electrical Installation
Condition Report.
651.2   Note should be made of any known changes in environmental conditions, building
structure,   and additions or alterations which have affected the suitability of the wiring
for its present load and method of installation.
651.4   During the inspection, the opportunity should be taken   to   identify dangers which might
arise during the testing. Any location and equipment for which safety precautions may
be necessary should be noted and the appropriate steps taken.
A   thorough inspection should be made of all electrical equipment which is   not
concealed, and should include the accessible internal condition of a sample of the
equipment. The external condition should be noted and if damage is identified or if
the degree of protection has been impaired, this should be recorded on the Schedule
of Inspections appended   to   the Report. The inspection should include a check on
the condition of electrical equipment and material, taking into   account   any available
manufacturer's information, with regard   to   the following:
(8)
(b)
(12)
(d )
(e)
(f)
(s)
( l1)
safety;
age;
damage and defects,
corrosion and external influent;e(s),
overloading (signs of),
wear and tear and environment,
change of use of location, and
suitability for continued use.
The   assessment   of condition should take   account   of known changes in conditions
influencing and affecting electrical safety, for example plumbing or structural changes.
Where parts of an electrical installation are excluded from the scope of a periodic
inspection and test, they should be identified in the 'Extent and limitations' section of
the Report.
Periodic inspection and testing should be undertaken in such a way as   to   minimise
disturbance of the installation and inconvenience   to   the user. Where it is necessary
to   disconnect   part   or the whole of an installation in order   to   carry   out   a   test,   the
disconnection should be made   at   a time agreed with the user and for the minimum
period needed   to   carry out the test. Where more than one   test   necessitates a
disconnection, where possible they should be made during one disconnection period.
643.3.2   A careful check should be made of the type of equipment on site so that the necessary
precautions can be taken, where conditions require,   to   disconnect or short-out
90
Guidance   Note   3:   Inspection and Testing
e The Institution of Engineering and Technology
I
n

electronic and other equipment which might be damaged by testing. Special care
must be taken where control and protective devices contain electronic components.
3.8.4   Setting inspection and testing samples
The inspector must be familiar with setting both inspection and testing sample
sizes as carrying   out   100   0/0   inspection or testing in many installations is unrealistic,
uneconomical and unachievable. Information is provided in this section and the
relevant sampling table, Table   3.3.
As pointed   out   in 3.8.3, one recommended procedure is for the inspector   to   carry   out
an initial walk-round survey   to   establish initial sample sizes   at   various points throughout
the installation. The detailed inspection is then started and the sample size is adjusted
upwards if necessary, depending upon the results obtained. Samples should be
selected that are representative of the whole installation. Parts of the installation that,
in the inspector's experience, are more likely   to   be problematic, should be prioritized.
Discussions of sampling and sample size selection are generally simplified and tend
to   be rather simplistic, and in practice   matters   are usuall   quite different. As discussed
previously an initial survey of the premises   must   be carried   out,   and quite likely, as with
most   buildings, different things will have been done   to   it   at   various times in its life, and
any samples selecte   MUST   be representative of the whole installation, and it may be
necessary   to   take   seperate   samples of the same thing in different areas. For example,
in a factory the condition of a fluorescent luminaire installation in the office area is
unlikely   to   be representative of the condition of a fluorescent luminaire installation in
the production area, even if they are the same type of luminaire.
Y
Inspectors will require all of their experience in setting sample locations and sizes and
should consider:
(a)
(b)
(f)
(4)
(e)
(f)
(8)
(h)
approximate age and probable condition of the electrical installation in the area
being inspected,
any electrical installation work carried   out   since the last inspection and   test,
any differences in the installation in the area (part of it may have been refurbished
or taken from another area),
type and usage of the installation or part thereof in that area (part of it may have
been used for another purpose previously),
ambient environmental conditions in the area and any differences in the ambient
environmental conditions over the area,
the   apparent   effectiveness of ongoing maintenance, if any,
period of time elapsed since previous inspection/testing,
the size of the installation and any differences in the ambient environmental
conditions over the area,
consultation with the installation owner, and
the quality of records such as electrical installation certificates, minor electrical
installation works certificates, previous periodic inspection reports, maintenance
records, site plans/drawings and data sheets relating to installed equipment.
It   should be noted that the initial sample size is based only on a walk-round and
consultation of records. Further, that what may   at   first appear   to   be good, for example,
the quality of maintenance may   turn   out   to   be poor during the detailed inspection
and testing.
d
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
91

Figure 3.1   Suggested procedure for setting initial and adjusted sample   sizes
good results   intermediate/ poor results
ent,   It   ma
Where the inspection or testing of a sample yields poor   or   unacceptable results this
would suggest that similar problems might exist elsewhere in uninspected or untested
items. The inspector will then need   to   either increase the sampling or refer back   to
the di   y be that the   inspector   recommends that 100   0/0   testing is carried   out
in that   area.
The principle of this is indicated in Figure 3.1.
ting
mg   C
As an example, consider the   tes   of final circuits   at   a   distribution board with a
sample size of 10   0/0 of the light'   ircuits. Suppose that more than one of these
circuits was found   to   have an unacceptably high earth fault loop impedance, with a
relatively low earth fault loop impedance   at   the incoming terminals   to   the distribution
board itself, and that there were no apparent factors   to   suggest why the final circuit
values were high. lt would be remiss   to   complete the Electrical Installation Condition
Report by using just this 10
U/o
sample and stating that improvements were required
for these circuits.   It   would be far more appropriate   to   increase the sample size or   to
recommend that all   ircuits   at   the distribution board were tested, based on the initial
findings.
C
If relatively small sample sizes are chosen it is important that these are representative
of the complete installation. Similarly, if a repeat periodic inspection is undertaken
using a sampling   system   then a different sample, again representative of the complete
installation,   must   be chosen. Therefore, previous periodic inspection and   test   records
should be consulted prior   to   commencement   of a sample inspection and   test.
Suggested sample sizes for visual inspections are provided in Table 3.3, suggested
sample sizes for testing are discussed in Section 3.10.1 and shown in Table 3.4.
92
Guidance note   3:   Inspection and Testing
o The Institution of Engineering and Technology

v   Table 3.3   Range of samples for inspection
if al circuit distribu
cards   than 25   0/0   (note 4)   ageing, check of cable
connections
Notes:
I
2
3
4
5
Where the inspection of a sample yields poor or unacceptable results this would
suggest that similar problems may exist elsewhere in the uninspected items. The
inspector will then need   to   either increase the sampling or refer back   to   the client,
it may be that the inspector recommends that   tOO   0/0   inspection is carried   out   in
that area.
100 0/c0 where practicable.
Generally, it is less appropriate   to   apply small sample sizing to the inspection
of socket-outlets compared   to   samples for lighting, as it is more likely that user
equipment will be hand-held and therefore of greater potential risk from electric
shock.
Do   not   'sample samples', resulting in a very low overall sampled installation.
Samples   must   be representative. If it is decided   to   sample, for example, sub rain
cables   at   10   0/0,   then further sampling should not be applied   to   the final circuit
distribution boards on these circuits.
One   easy way   to   remember sampling is   to   reflect on the fact that where just 10
0/0   of final circuits have been inspected, this actually means that 90
0/o have
been inspected.
not
Whenever samples are taken and whatever sample size is utilized the inspector   must
remember that the requirement of the report is   to   say whether or   not   the electrical
installation being inspected (subject to any agreed limitations) is suitable or   not   for
continued use. The inspector MUST carry   out   sufficient inspection and testing   to   allow
them   to   make that judgment.
3.9   Periodic inspection
3.9.1   Example checklist of items that require inspection
Appx   6   The following is a copy of the checklist in Appendix   6   of BS 7671, which lists items   at
various locations within an installation that may require inspection. The items in this
checklist are examples, the list in   not   exhaustive.
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
93

visual inspection only as this is   DNO ELECTRICAL INTAKE EQUIPMENT
S
.equipment
>
>
>
>
»»
>
PARALLEL OR SWITCHED ALTERNATIVE SOURCES OF SUPPLY
>
Service cable
Service head
Distributor's earthing arrangement
Meter tails - Distributor/Consumer
Metering equipment
Isolator
1
|»
I
2
3
4
Presence of adequate arrangements where   generator   to   operate   as a switched
alternative (55I.6)
Dedicated earthing   arrangement   independent of that of the public supply
(ssi.4.s.2.i)
Presence of adequate arrangements where generator   to   operate in parallel with the
public supply system (55-.7)
Correct connection of generator in parallel (55112)
Compatibility of characteristics of means of generation (55113)
Means   to   provide automatic disconnection of generator in the   event   of loss of
public supply system or voltage or frequency deviation beyond declared values
(55l.7.4)
Means   Io   prevent   connection of generator in the   event   of loss of public supply
system   or voltage or frequency deviation beyond declared values (55175)
Means   to   isolate generator from the public supply system (55116) 5
.AUTOMATIC DISCONNECTION OF SUPPLY
>
>
I
2
3
4
I*
1
Protective earthing/protective bonding arrangements (411.3; Chap 54)
Presence and adequacy of
Distributor's earthing arrangement (542.1.2.i, 542.l.2.2), or installation earth
electrode arrangement (542.1.2.3)
Earthing conductor and connections (Section 526,   5423),   543.H, 542.3.2)
Main protective bonding conductors and connections (Section 526; 544.t,
544.r.2)
Earthing/bonding labels   at   all appropriate locations (51-4.13)
Accessibility of
Earthing conductor connections
All protective bonding connections (543.3.2)
FELV - requirements satisfied (4ll.7, 41l.7.l)
2
P
'OTHER METHODS OF PROTECTION
(Where   any   of the methods listed below are employed details should be provided on
'SE'parat€   pages)
BASIC AND FAULT PROTECTION
'where used, confirmation that the requirements are satisfied:
SELV (Section 414)
PELV (Section 414)
Double insulation (Section 412)
Reinforced insulation (Section 412)
>
>
>
>
BASIC PROTECTION.
>
»»
P
>
FAULT PROTECTION:
>
>
>
Insulation of live parts (4l6.1)
Barriers or enclosures (416.2, 416.2.1)
Obstacles (Section 417, 417.2.1, 417.2.2)
Placing out of reach (Section 417; 417.3)
Non-conducting location (4181)
Earth-free local equipotential bonding (4l8.2)
Electrical separation (Section 413, 418.3)
94
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology

ADDITIONAL PROTECTION
>
|»
SPECIFIC INSPECTION EXAMPLES
DISTRIBUTION EQUIPMENT
>
>
>
|»
|»
>
>
1»
v
>
>
»
r
|»
r
»»
|»
r
>
1
4
>
|»
>
>
P
>
RaDs   not   exceeding 30 mA as specified (4ll.3.3, 415.1)
Supplementary bonding (Section 415, 415.2)
.as appropriate   to   the installation
Security of fixing (134.1.l)
Insulation of live parts   not   damaged during erection (4161)
Adequacy/security of barriers (416.2)
Suitability of enclosures for IP and fire ratings (4162, 421.1.6, 421.1.201, 5265)
Enclosures not damaged during installation (I34.l.l)
Presence and effectiveness of obstacles (4172)
Components are suitable according   to   manufacturers' assembly instructions or
literature (536.4.203)
Presence of main switch(es), linked where required (462.1, 462.1.201)
Operation of main switch(es) (functional check) (643.10; 462.1.201)
Manual operation of circuit-breakers and RCDs   to   prove functionality (643.lO)
Confirmation that integral test button/switch causes RCD(s) to trip when operated
(functional check) (643.lO)
RCD(s) provided for fault protection, where specified (411.4.204, 411.5.2, 531.2)
RCD(s) provided for additional protection, where specified (4ll.3.3; 4l5.l)
Confirmation overvoltage protection (SPDs) provided where specified (s34.4.1.i)
Confirmation of indication that SPD is functional (651.4)
Presence of RCD six-monthly   test   notice at or near the origin (5l4.l2.2)
Presence of diagrams, charts or schedules   at   or near each distribution board, where
required (5l4.9.l)
Presence of non-standard (mixed) cable colour warning notice at or near the
appropriate distribution board, where required (5l4.i4)
Presence of alternative supply warning notice   at   or near (5l4.l5)
The origin
2   The   meter   position, if   remote   from origin
3   The distribution board   to   which the alternative/additional sources are connected
All points of isolation of ALL sources of supply
Presence of next inspection recommendation label (5l4.l2.l)
Presence of other required labelling (Section 514)
Selection of protective device(s) and base(s),   correct   type and rating (4ll.3.2,
411.4, .5, .6, Sections 432, 433, 434)
Single-pole protective devices in line conductors only (l32.l4.l, 530.3.2, 643.63
Protection against mechanical damage where cables   enter   equipment (522.8.1,
522.85 522.a.1r)
Protection   against electromagnetic   effects   where cables enter   ferromagnetic
enclosures (521.5.l)
Confirmation that ALL conductor connections, including connections   to   busbars, are
correctly located in terminals and are tight and secure (526.l)
The use of individual   components   in a distribution board or consumer unit assembly
-complying with their respective product standard(s) does   not   indicate their compatibility
'when installed with other components in a low voltage switchgear and controlgear
-assembly.
r
Incorporated   components   inside the assembly can be from different manufacturers.
It is essential that all incorporated components should have their compatibility for the
final enclosed arrangements verified by the original manufacturer of the assembly
-and be assembled in accordance with their instructions, for example, the consumer
unit, distribution board manufacturer. The original manufacturer is the organisation
that carried   out   the original design and the associated verification of the low voltage
-switchgear and controlgear assembly   to   the relevant   part   of the BS   EN   61439   series.
If an assembly deviates from its original manufacturer's instructions, or includ
Guidance Note   3:   Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
95

-components   not   included in the original verification, the person introducing the
deviation becomes the original manufacturer with the corresponding obligations. The
inspector may wish   to   note   such assemblies for further investigation.
I
2
3
4
5
'CIRCUITS
|»
>
>
>
I#
P
>
>
>
>
>
>
1»
>
I
2
3
4
5
>
-Consumer unit standards have also evolved over the years   to   provide coordinated
"conditional ratings".
BS 5486-13: 1979 had a 6 kA,   10   kA, or 16 kA conditional rating as part of
a British Standard. So need to check label or instructions for CM6, CM1O or
CMI6
BS 5486-13: 19B9 had a 16 kA conditional rating as part of a British Standard.
BS   5486-13 was withdrawn and replaced by   BS   EN 60439-3: 1991
BS EN 60439-3: 1991 had UK National deviation Annex ZA 16 kA conditional
rating. BS EN 60439-3: 1991 was withdrawn and replaced by BS EN 60439-3:
2012
BS EN 61439-3: 2012 has UK National deviation Annex ZB 16 kA conditional
rating.
BS   EN   61439-3:   2012   (Incorporating   corrigenda   September   2013   and
December 2015) is the only   current   version for new installations but the older
equipment may still be in use in installations.
Identification of conductors (514831)
Cables correctly supported throughout (522.8.5; 521.10.202)
Examination   of   cables   for   signs   of   mechanical   damage   during   installation
(522.6.i,   522.8.1, 522.883)
Examination of insulation of live parts, not damaged during erection (522.6.1,
522.8.l)
Non-sheathed cables protected by enclosure in   conduit, ducting or trunking
(52l.l0.l)
Suitability of containment systems (including flexible conduit) (Section 522)
Correct temperature rating of cable insulation (522.l.l, Table 52.l)
Adequacy of cables for current-carrying capacity with regard for the   type   and
nature   of installation (Section 523)
Adequacy of protective devices: type and fault current rating for fault protection
(4345)
Presence and adequacy of circuit protective conductors (4ll.3.1,   543.l)
Coordination   between   conductors   and   overload   protective   devices   (433.t,
533.2.1)
Wiring systems and cable installation methods/practices with regard to the type
and   nature   of installation and external influences (Section 522)
Cables concealed under floors, above ceilings, in walls/partitions, adequately
protected against damage (522.6.20i, .202, .2o4)
Provision   of   additional   protection   by   RCDs   having rated   residual   operating
current (An) not exceeding 30 mA
For circuits used   to   supply mobile equipment   not   exceeding 32 A rating for use
outdoors (4ll.3.3)
For all socket-outlets of rating 20 A or less, unless exempt (41l.3.3)
For cables concealed in walls   at   a depth of less than   so   mm (522.6.202, .203)
For cables concealed in walls/partitions containing metal parts regardless of
depth (522.6.202; .203)
Circuits supplying luminaires within domestic (household) premises
(4ll.3.-4)
Provision of fire barriers, sealing arrangements so as   to   minimize the spread of
fire (Section 527)
Band II cables segregated/separated from Band I cables (528.l)
Cables segregated/separated from non-electrical services (5283)
|»
>
96
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology

>
1
2
3
4
>
»»
>
>
Termination of cables   at   enclosures (Section 526)
Connections under no undue strain (526.6, 522.8.5)
No basic insulation of a conductor visible outside enclosure (526.8)
Connections of live conductors adequately enclosed (5265)
Adequately connected   at   point of entry to enclosure (glands, bushes etc.)
(522.8.5)
Suitability of circuit accessories for external influences (5122)
Circuit accessories   not   damaged during erection (l34.l.l)
Single-pole devices for switching or protection in line conductors only (l32.l4.l,
sso.s.2,   643.6)
Adequacy of connections, including cps,   within accessories and   at   fixed and
stationary equipment (Section 526)
ISOLATION AND SWITCHING
>
I
4
5
>
I
2
3
4
5
>
I
2
3
4
>
I
2
Isolators (5372)
Presence and location of appropriate devices (462, 5312)
2   Capable of being secured in the OFF position (537.2.4)
3   Correct operation verified (functional check) (643.10)
The installation, circuit or   part   thereof that will be isolated clearly identified by
location and/or durable marking (537.2.7)
Warning notice posted in situation where live parts   cannot   be isolated by the
operation of a single device (537.1.2, 514.11.1)
Switching off for mechanical maintenance (464, 537.3.2)
Presence of appropriate devices (464.1, 537.3.2)
Acceptable location -   state   if local or   remote   from equipment in question
(537.3.s.6)
Capable of being secured in the OFF position (464.2)
Correct operation verified (functional check) (643.10)
The circuit or part thereof   to   be disconnected clearly identified by location
and/or durable marking (537.3.2.4)
Emergency switching/stopping (465, 537.3.3, 537.4)
Presence of appropriate devices (465.1, 537.3.3, 5314)
Readily accessible for operation where danger might occur (537.3.3.6)
Correct operation verified (functional check) (643.10)
The installation, circuit or part thereof   to   be disconnected clearly identified
by location and/or durable marking (537.3.3.6)
Functional switching (537.3.1; 4631)
Presence of appropriate devices (537.311, 537.312)
Correct operation verified (functional check) (537.311, 537.312,   643.10)
CURRENT-USING EQUIPMENT (PERMANENTLY CONNECTED)
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
I
Suitability of equipment in   terms   of IP and fire ratings (416.2, 421.1, 421.1.201,
526.5)
Enclosure   not   damaged/deteriorated during installation so as   to   impair safety
l154.].1)
Suitability for the environment and external influences (5l2.2)
Security of fixing (l34.l.l)
Cable   entry   holes in ceilings above luminaires, sized or sealed so as   to   restrict
the spread of fire (5272)
Provision of undervoltage protection, where specified (Section 445)
Provision of overload protection, where specified (Section 433, 552.l)
Recessed luminaires (downlighters)
Correct   type of lamps fitted (5S9.3.l)
2   Installed   to   minimize build-up of heat (42l.l.2, 559.4.1)
Adequacy of working space/accessibility   to   equipment (i32.r2, 5r3.i)
Particular requirements for special locations are fulfilled.
>
PART   7   SPECIAL INSTALLATIONS OR LOCATIONS
Guidance Note   3:   Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
97

3.10   Periodic testing
3.10.1 General
651.1   The   periodic testing is supplementary to the inspection of the installation, see 3.8.1.
The same range and level of testing as for initial testing is   not   necessarily required, or
indeed possible. Installations that have been previously tested and for which there are
comprehensive records of test results may not need the same degree of testing as
installations for whi h no such records exist. C
651.5   Periodic testing may cause danger if the   correct   procedures are   not   applied. Persons
carrying   out   periodic testing   must   be competent in the use of the instruments employed
and have adequate knowledge and experience of the type of installation, see   3.8.1.
The inspector will need   to   set   a sample size for testing. Notes on the principle of
this are included in 3.8.4, which should be studied together with the guidance on
suggested   tests   in Table 3.4.
Where a sample   test   indicates results significantly different from those previously
recorded, further investigation is necessary. Also, if during the course of testing a
sample, significant errors are found that suggest that the same problems might exist
in untested items, the inspector should take appropriate action by either increasing
the sampling or referring back   to   the client regarding the   matter,   it may be that the
inspector recommends that 100 per cent testing   out in that area. This
principle is mentioned earlier, in Figure 3.1.
is carried
3.10.2 Tests to be made
651.2   The   tests   considered appropriate by   the inspection should
be carried   out   in accordance with the recommendations   in   Table 3.4 and considering
Sections   3.8.1   to   3.8.4 of this Guidance Note.
the person carrying   out
See Section 2.6 of this Guidance note for test methods, noting that alternative methods
may be used provided they give reliable results.
'Y  Table 3.4   Testing   to   be carried   out   where practicable on existing installations   (see   notes
i   and 2)
>   to   extraneous ontinuity
f bonding
onductors   >
Main   protective   bonding   conductors
conductive-parts
Supplementary bonding conductors
98
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
e   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

unctional tests   Tests as required by Regulation 6431, fol owe   by operation o
the integral test button
CD5
unctional   tests
f circuit-breahers,
elaters and
itching devi
Manual operation   to   confirm that the devices disconnect th
supply
Notes:
I
2
3
4
5
6
7
Hue person carrying out the testing should decide which of the above   tests   are
appropriate by using their experience and knowledge of the installation being
inspected and tested and by consulting any available records, see 3.8.4 of this
Guidance Note.
Where sampling is applied, the   percentage   used is   at   the discretion of the inspector,
see   3.8.4   of this Guidance Note (a   percentage   of less than   Io   0/o   is inadvisable).
The tests need   not   be carried   out   in the order shown in the table.
The earth fault loop impedance   test   may be used   to   confirm the continuity of
protective conductors   at   socket-outlets and where it is safe   to   do so,   at   accessible
exposed-conductive-parts of current-using equipment and accessories.
Generally, accessibility may be considered   to   be within   5   m from the floor or from
where a person can stand.
Where the circuit includes surge protective devices (SPDs) or other electronic
devices which require a connection   to   earth for functional purposes, these devices
will require disconnecting to avoid influencing the   test   result and   to   avoid damaging
them.
Where an installation is fully loaded and the conductors are at their normal operating
temperatures   measured loop impedance values can be directly compared   to   the
maximum values of earth fault loop impedance set out in the Tables in Chapter   41
of the Regulations. Loop impedance data for unloaded conductors   at   20
"C
can
be found in   the IET On-site Guide.
99
Q
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology

3.10.3   Additional notes on periodic testing
This section provides some notes on the practicalities of carrying   out   the periodic tests,
particularly within an installation where only partial isolation is practicable.
Continuity of protective earthing and bonding conductors, and
earth fault loop impedance testing
If an electrical installation is isolated from the supply, it is permissible   to   disconnect
protective earthing and bonding conductors from the main earthing terminal in order
to   verify their continuity.
a
Where it is not practicable   to   isolate an electrical installation from the supply, the
protective earthing or bonding conductors should   not   be disconnected as, under fault
conditions, the exposed-conductive-parts and extraneous-conductive-parts could be
raised   to   a dangerous voltage relative   to   Earth potential. Also, measurement of earth
fault loop impedance   at   various parts of the installation is, for practical reasons, carried
out with the protective earthing and bonding conductors connected.
A convenient way   to   carry   out   the above periodic   tests   in a large installation could
be   to   use the wandering lead method to test continuity (see 2.6.5, test method 2)
noting that the conductors were not disconnected for these tests, and to directly
measure earth fault loop impedance   at   the same time. with the earthing and bonding
conductors connected the   tests   confirm connection but   not   the continuity of the
conductors involved.
Motor circuits
Loop impedance tests on   motor   circuits can only be carried   out   on the supply side of
isolated   motor   controlgear. A continuity test between the circuit protective conductor
and the   motor   is then necessary.
b   Insulation resistance
Insulation resistance   tests   should be made on electrically isolated circuits with any
electronic equipment which might be damaged by application of the test voltage
disconnected, or only a measurement   to   protective earth made with the live conductors
connected together.
For most installations the   most   practical test is an insulation resistance   test   between
live conductors (connected together) and earth, in practice time does   not   usually allow
for a line   to   neutral   test.
Check that information/warnings are given at the distribution board of circuits or
equipment likely   to   be damaged by testing. Any diagram, chart or table should also
include this warning.
The results of insulation testing should be compared with previous results where
possible. Table   2.2   of this Guidance Note (Table 64 of BS 7671) requires a minimum
insulation resistance of   l   MQ, but strictly speaking this value applies only   to   initial
verification. lt can, however, be used as a guide for periodic testing.
Where equipment is disconnected for these   tests   and the equipment has exposed-
conductive-parts required by the Regulations   to   be connected   to   protective conductors,
the insulation resistance between the exposed-conductive-parts and all live   parts   of the
equipment should be measured separately and ought   to   comply with the requirements
of the appropriate British Standard for the equipment.
100
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
.Q

There is a range of possible   outcomes   when carrying   out   insulation testing. Tests are
typically made between all live conductors connected together and Earth   at   a   test
voltage of   $00   V DC
The inspector will need   to   measure the values of insulation resistance for a given
distribution board and then take a view based on his or her engineering judgment
as   to   whether the results obtained are acceptable. lt should be noted that distribution
boards with large numbers of final circuits will generally give a lower insulation
resistance value than distribution boards with fewer final circuits.
C   Polarity
It   should be established whether there have been any additions or alterations   to   the
installation since its last inspection. If no additions or alterations have been made, the
polarity test is a good example of where sampling can be applied.
For example, the following sampling could be used:
IO   0/0   of all single-pole and multi-pole control devices and of any   centre-contact
lampholders, together with   100   0/0   of all readily-accessible socket-outlets. If any
incorrect polarity is found then a full   test   should be made in that   part   of the installation
supplied by the particular distribution board concerned, and the sample testing
increased for the remainder of the installation (say   to   25   0/0); if additional cases of
incorrect polarity are found in the   25   0/0   sample, a full test of the complete installation
should be made, see Figure   3.1.
643.10
d   Operation of overcurrent circuit-breakers
Where protection against   overcurrent   is provided by circuit-breakers, the   manual
operating mechanism of each circuit-breaker should be operated   to   verify that the
device opens and closes satisfactorily.
It   is not normally necessary or practicable   to   test   the operation of the automatic tripping
mechanism of circuit-breakers. As such,   a   test   would need   to   be made   at   a   current
substantially exceeding the minimum tripping   current   in order   to   achieve operation
within a reasonable time. For circuit-breakers   to   as   EN 60898 a   test   current   of   not
less than   two   and a half times the rated tripping   current   of the device is needed for
operation within one minute, and much larger   test   currents   would be necessary   to
verify operation of the mechanism for instantaneous tripping.
For circuit-breakers of the sealed   type,   designed   not   to   be maintained, if there is doubt
about the integrity of the automatic mechanism it will normally be more practicable
to   replace the device than   to   make further tests. Such doubt may arise from visual
inspection, if the device appears   to   have suffered damage or undue deterioration, or
where there is evidence that the device may have failed   to   operate satisfactorily in
service.
Circuit-breakers with the facility for injection testing may be so tested and, if appropriate,
relay settings confirmed.
e   Operation of devices for isolation and switching
Where means are provided in accordance with the requirements of the Regulations
for isolation and switching, the devices should be operated   to   verify their effectiveness
and checked   to   ensure adequate and   correct   labellings.
Guidance   Note   3:   Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
101

It should be verified by inspection that easy access   to   such devices is maintained and
that effective operation is   not   be impaired by any material placed near the device.
Access   and operation areas may be required   to   be marked   to   ensure they are kept
clear.
For isolating devices in which the position of the   contacts   or other means of isolation is
externally visible, visual inspection of operation is sufficient and no testing is required.
The operation of every safety switching device s   d
the device in the manner normally intended   to   confirm
correctly in accordance with the requirements of BS 767
hoLll   be checked by operating
that it performs its function
Where it is a requirement that the device interrup   H the supply conductors, the
use of a proprietary test lamp, or two-pole voltage d   tor   connected between each
line and the neutral on the load side of the switching device is essential   to   confirm
isolation. Reliance should not be placed on a simple observation that the equipment
controlled has ceased   to   operate.
To   a
eteg
Where switching devices are provided with detachable or lockable handles in accordance
with the Regulations, a check should be made   to   verify that the handles or keys are
not   interchangeable with any others available within the premises.
643.10   Where any form of interlocking is provided, 5ud'r as between a main circuit-breaker
and an outgoing switch or isolation device, the integrity of the interlocking must be
verified, this may be beyond the scope of the inspector and something that is referred
to   a manufacturer or specialist.
Where switching devices are provided for isolation or for mechanical maintenance
switching, the integrity of the means provided   to   prevent   any equipment from being
unintentionally or inadvertently energised or reactivated   must   be verified.
f   Operation of RCDs
643.7   Fault protection
Where an RCD is pr   d for Fault Protection the operating time should generally be
no greater than thos   stated in Table   41.1   (Regulation 411.4.5) for final circuits and   5
seconds for distribution circuits. Unless supplementary bonding has been applied in
accordance with Regulation 41983.
ovide
Additional protection
643.8   Where an RCD with a rated residual operating current not exceeding 30 mA is used   to
provide additional protection in the event of failure of basic protection and/or failure of
the provision for fault protection or carelessness by users, the effectiveness is deemed
to   have been verified where an RCD meeting the requirements of Regulation 415.11
disconnects within 40 ms when tested   at   a   current   equal   to   or higher than five times its
rated residual operating   current   (5 IAn) The maximum   test   time should not exceed   40
ms, unless the protective conductor potential rises by less than   50   v   - the instrument
manufacturer will advise on compliance.
3.11   Electrical Installation   Condition Report
653.1   A model of the report, entitled 'Electrical Installation Condition Report', is provided
in Appendix 6 of BS 7671 together with some model Schedules of Inspections and
102
Guidance note   3:   Inspection and Testing
®   The Institution of Engineering and Technology
Q   .

Schedules of Test results. Typical completed forms are given in Chapter 5 of this
Guidance Note.
ThefuH   Electrical Installation Condition Report documentation comprises the following:
Electrical Installation Condition Report
and
Schedule of inspections   (one or more)
and
Schedule of   fest   results   (o ne or move)
On completion of periodic inspection and testing, the Electrical Installation Condition
Report and its accompanying schedules of inspections and schedules of   test   results
must   be given   to   the client or person who ordered the inspection.
653.2
Part 2
A   most   important point   to   remember is that any damage, deterioration, defects,
dangerous conditions and non-compliance with BS 7671 that may give rise   to   danger
(danger   being a risk or injury   to   persons or livestock) must be recorded on the   report.
There are classification codes C1 to C3 for danger and non-compliances with BS 7671,
these being explained in Table   3.5.
Each separate item entered in the Section K Observations section of the Report should
be coded Cl, C2 or CO as appropriate, or, exceptionally, FI. Only one classification code
is to be recorded against each observation.
Where an installation defect or non-compliance with the Regulations has attracted a
Code ii, C2 or FI the overall assessment of the report   must   be "unsatisfac;tory".
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
103

v   Table 3.5   Classification of danger and non-compliances (for use during periodic inspection
and testing)
otentially dangerous
urgent remedial
action required
To be attributed for issues that, wheel
urgent,   do   not   require   immediat
remedial action. Examples include a non
earthed installation (this requires a forth
fault to result in danger), fundamentall
undersized   cables.   earth   fault   too
impedance values greater than required b
BS 7671, a 'borrowed' neutral, equipment
with inappropriately selected lP (this ma
warrant   c i   if severe), insulation reading
under   i   MQ. connections not   house
within appropriate enclosures
104
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
@~

3.12 Periodic inspection of installations constructed
to an earlier edition of BS   1671   or the IEE Wiring
Regulations
People often ask what standard should be applied when carrying   out   the periodic
inspection of an installation constructed in accordance with an earlier edition of
BS 7671, or an even earlier edition of the IEE Wiring Regulations or   to   an unknown
standard. Each edition of the Wiring Regulations has provided for an increase of safety
to   the users of installations. Particular installation practices and methods that were
compliant with earlier editions would be considered   to   be unacceptable now, such as
the use of a public   water   pipe as a means of earthing, which would be considered as
potentially dangerous now.
In   all   C
It   is   lik
ases the inspection should be carried out against the   current   edition of BS   7671.
ely that there will be items that do   not   comply with that edition but this does
not   ne   arily mean that the installation is unsafe. If the inspector considers that an
item, a   ugh not warranting Code C1 or CQ, requires improvement, it should be given
code C3 on the Electrical Installation Condition Report. If the item does not require
improvement it does not need   to   be recorded as an observation.
less
I t o
Reference is made   to   existing installations both in the second paragraph of the
Introduction   to   BS 76712018 and in the Note by the Health and Safety Executive
which follows the Preface to BS 7671:20IB.
Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
105

106
Guidance note 3: Inspection and Testing
o   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

4.1   Instrument standard
BS EN 61010   Safety requirements for electrical equipment for measurement control,
and Iuboretory use   is the basic: safety standard for electrical   test   instruments.
The basic instrument standard is   BS EN 61557 Electrical safety in low voltage distribution
systems up   to   IOOO V o.c. and   F500   V d.c. Equipment for testing, meosurrhg or
monitoring of protective measures.   This standard includes performance requirements
and requires compliance with BS EN 61010.
In   Section   1.1   of this Guidance Note, reference was made   to   the use of test leads
conforming   to   HSE   Guidance   Note   GS   38.   The HSE always advise only   to   carry   out   live
tests   that are actually useful and informative so as   to   minimise danger,   so always consider
whether any particular live   test   is necessary before undertaking it. The safety measures
and procedures set out in GS 38 should be observed for all instruments, leads, probes
and accessories. It should be noted that some   test   instrument manufacturers advise
that their instruments be used in conjunction with fused   test   leads and probes. Other
manufacturers advise the use of non-fused leads and probes when the instrument has
in-built electrical protection, but it should be noted that such electrical protection does
not extend   to   the probes and leads.
BS 7671 Appendix 14 also recommends that "the   measurement   should always be
made on the   output   terminals of a suitably rated protective device. If such a device
is   not   present then a   temporary   one should be fitted. Measurement should never be
made where   overcurrent   protection is   not   present   between the point of connection
and the transformer. Fused test leads alone do   not   meet   this requirement". When
unsure a risk   assessment   should be carried   out   to   establish if fused   test   leads should
be used.
4.2   Instrument   accuracy
The accuracy of a new or repaired instrument should be established   to   provide a point
of reference. Accuracy is usually confirmed by calibration, but a calibration certificate
may   not   be supplied with the instrument unless specifically requested. A certificate of
conformity may be provided. This indicates that the instrument's accuracy was verified
as part of the manufacturing process. Such verification follows the same procedure as
calibration, but individual calibration data is   not   issued.
Guidance note 3: Inspection   a.   Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
107

A basic   measurement   accuracy of 5   0/0   is usually adequate. In the case of analogue
instruments, a basic accuracy of 2   0/0   of full-scale deflection will provide the required
accuracy   measurement   over a useful proportion of the scale.
It   should   not   be assumed that the accuracy of the reading taken in normal field use
will be as good as the basic accuracy. The 'operating accuracy' is always worse than
the basic accuracy, and additional errors derive from three sources:
(as
Instrument errors:   basic instrument accuracy applies only in ideal conditions,
and the actual reading accuracy can also be affected by:
(i)
(ii)
Digital instruments
Sources   of error:   test   leads, fused leads, battery condition, ambient temperature,
electrical noise   etc.
Analogue instruments
Orientation of the instrument on older instruments hand cranked units, cranking speed
can also affect performance.
Loss   of   calibration:   instruments   should   be   periodically   calibrated   following
manufacturer's   recommendations   and   procedures   traceable   to   national
Standards. Intermediate checks can be made   to   ensure there are no major
errors in   measurement   by comparing readings   to   those obtained from other
instruments, or by the use of a proprietary 'check box' having clearly defined
characteristics.
(b)
In all cases the   type   and frequency of recalibration or checking required should be
as specified by the instrument manufacturer. However, the user should take into
account ambient environmental and usage factors as appropriate. For example, if
an instrument is left in storage   at   a constant   temperature   in a dry environment
for long periods and/or is used infrequently, the user may be able   to   extend the
recalibration interval. However, if an instrument is roughly handled and is regularly
transported   and   stored   in   vehicles,   and   hence   is   subjected   to   fluctuations   in
temperature and humidity caused by changes in time of day/night and time of year,
then more frequent confirmation of accuracy would be appropriate.
Instruments should also be subjected   to   regular checks before use so that errors
caused by deterioration of leads, probes,   connectors etc.   do   not   result in inaccurate
readings being recorded when, for example, schedules of   test   results are compiled.
It   is essential that an instrument is inspected for damage and the safety
and the accuracy of an instrument is confirmed after any incidences of
mechanical or electrical mishandling.
(C)
Field errors:   the instrument reading accuracy will also be affected by external
influences as a result of   working in the field environment. These influences
can take many forms, and some sources of inaccuracy are described in the
appropriate sections.
BS EN 61557 requires a maximum operating error of no more than   i30   0/o   of reading
over the stated measurement range, taking into account worst case environmental,
supply and battery conditions.
To achieve satisfactory in-service performance, it is essential   to   be fully informed about
the   test   equipment, how it is   to   be used, and the accuracy   to   be expected.
108
Guidance Note 3: Inspection   a.   Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
|   l

Typically, in analogue instruments this corresponds   to   making   measurements   very near
to the zero point on the scale, where inaccuracies and non-repeatability are   not at   all
evident with this type of electromechanical   movement.
Traceability to National Standards can be assured by using a calibration laboratory
accredited by a National Accreditation Body.   In   the UK this is the United Kingdom
Accreditation Service (UKAS). A list   of accredited laboratories can be found   at
www.ukas.com or a search for sources of calibration by instrument can be made   at
www.ukas.org/calibration
4.3   Low-resistance ohmmeters
643.2.1   The continuity of   conductors and connections   to   exposed-conductive-parts and
extraneous-conductive   parts,   if any, shall be verified by a   measurement   of resistance
on;
ca)
(b)
protective conductors, including protective bonding conductors, and
in the case of ring final circuits, live conductors.
The instrument used for low-resistance   tests   may be either a specialised low-resistance
ohmmeter or the continuity range of an insulation and continuity tester. The   test   current
may be DC or AC It is recommended that it be derived from a source with no-load
voltage between   4   V and   24   v,   and a short-circuit   current   of   not   less than 200 mA.
The measuring range should cover the span 0.2   Q   to 2   Q,   with a resolution of   at   least
0.01   Q   for digital instruments.
Instruments conforming   to   BS EN 61557-4 will meet the above requirements.
Field effects contributing   to   in-service errors include probe or crock-clip   contact
resistance, test lead resistance, AC interference and thermocouple effects in mixed
metal systems.
Whilst   contact   resistance   cannot   be eliminated with two-terminal testers, and can
introduce errors, the effects of lead resistance can be eliminated by measuring this
prior   to   a test, and subtracting the resistance from the final value or using the   test
instrument's 'nulling' feature built-in   to   most modern instruments. Interference from
an external AC source (interference pick-up)   cannot   be eliminated, although it may
be indicated by vibration of the pointer of an analogue instrument or unstable digital
readout. Thermocouple effects can be eliminated by reversing the test probes and
averaging the resistance readings taken in each direction.
4.4   Insulation resistance testers
The instrument used should be capable of developing the test voltage required across
the load.
The test   voltage required is:
Table   64   (a)
(b)
250   V   DC;   for SELV and PELV circuits with equipment such as SPDs that may
influence   test   results or be damaged - but the insulation resistance is   to   be   at
least l   MQ   (6-43.3.2),
500   V   DC for all circuits rated up   to   and including 500 V except SELV and PELV
circuits, and
Guidance note 3: Inspection 8: Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
109

(C)
1000 V DC for circuits rated above 500 V up   to   1000 V.
Instruments   conforming   to   BS   EN   61557-2   will fulfil all the above instrument
requirements.
When the current is applied by an insulation resistance test what we see as total
current comprises of three parts. When an insulation resistance   test   is applied   to   a
test subject, the   measurement   may be influenced by different circuit characteristics,
for   exa   mplez
(a)
(b)
(¢)
capacitive charging;
absorption or polarisation of the insulation, and
conduction or leakage currents.
These factors can be reduced or eliminated by extending the   test   time for which
the   test   voltage is applied, and can be seen as a steady insulation reading on the
instrument, aher an initial rapid increase in value.
Capacitance may be as high as 5 1JF, and the instrument should have an automatic
discharge facility capable of   safely discharging such a capacitance. Following an
insulation resistance test, the instrument should be left connected until the capacitance
within the installation has been fully discharged.
4.5   Earth fault loop impedance testers
Loop impedance testing is the practice of measuring the impedance of a live circuit.
Typically the circuit voltage, either Line-neutral, Line-Earth or Line-Line, is first measured
to   acquire the off-load voltage.   A   load is then applied and the new circuit voltage is
measured. The volt drop is used   to   calculate the impedance of the circuit. Exactly how
this is done differs between manufactures. However all methods can be presented
with electrical conditions that present a challenge   to   the measurement. Sources of
error can include:
(a)
(b)
(C)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(2)
electrical noise and transients,
external load switching,
harmonics,
RCD uplift;
test lead contact resistance,
proximity   to   the source transformer, and
instrument resolution.
Three types of   measurement   are typically available, listed in order of preference:
(a)
(b)
(11)
two-wire high   current   test,
three-wire non-trip   test,   and
two-wire non-trip test.
Two-wire high   current   test:
This is the   test   that should always be employed unless there is an RCD or   RCBO   in
the circuit. The load used usually   generates   between 2 A and 15 A. This is sufficient   to
create   a measurable voltage drop and consequently a stable and   accurate   result. The
test usually lasts for no more than 3-4 seconds in total, with the load being   present   for
no more than   40ms   on   two   consecutive half cycles.
110
Guidance   note   3:   Inspection & Testing
o   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

Test   currents   higher than 15 A   tripping some low   current   MCBs. risk
Three-wire non-trip test:
Where there are RCDs or RCBOs present, the Line-Earth fault loop impedance may be
carried   out   using a non-trip loop impedance test. The load   current   is significantly small
enough not   to   trip the RCD. Typically this is around 15   mA.   However   i s   mA   does not
create   a significant volt drop. Consequently many more   test   cycles are performed, the
test runs for significantly longer, and the results are far more susceptible   to   variation.
Two wire non-trip test
The third option on some instruments is a two wire non~trip   test.   This has the advantage
of   not   requiring the third   test   lead   to   be connected, and is especially useful on some
lighting circuits.
The drawback is that it is the   most   technically difficult test for the instrument and can
be susceptible   to   more errors than the three wire test, and should only be used as a
last   resort.
Safety
To minimize electric shock hazard from the potential of the protective conductor during
Line-Earth impedance tests, the test duration should be within safe limits. For two-
wire high   current   tests, the instrument should cut off the test   current   after 40 ms or
a time determined by the safety limits derived from the information contained within
DD IEc/rs 60479-1   Effects of   current   on huron   beiNgs and livestock. General
aspects,   if the voltage rise of the protective conductor exceeds 50 V during the   test.   On
some installations this threshold may be   25   V,   especially where livestock are present.
For low current (non-trip) tests the instrument   must   monitor the earth voltage and
disconnect the   test   should the earth voltage be exceed.
Sources of error
The lower the load   current   employed in the   test,   the more variation and error is
likely in the result as the volt drop is proportionally lower. Distortion or noise on the
supply will also compromise accuracy and repeatability, as the instrument cannot easily
differentiate between a volt drop created by the applied load or a voltage change
induced by noise or harmonics etc. For this reason the test with the higher load
currents   should always be used where possible.
Repeating a test is advised if there is concern for the validity of the result, especially
on   noisy supplies.
RCD uplift
This is a phenomenon frequently encountered when performing a   two   or three
wire Non-trip test. During the test the RCD internal impedance may sometimes be
measured, increasing the overall circuit impedance. This may be as high as 0.5   Q   or
more.
RCD uplift can be avoided by choosing an instrument that declares immunity   to   this
effect. Alternatively, if uplift is suspected, measuring on the source and load sides
Guidance note 3: Inspection   a.   Testing
0   'the   Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
111

of the RCD will identify any additional impedance within the RCD. This can then be
deleted from the   measurement.
This phenomenon is   not   encountered with high test   currents,   but these   tests   will trip
the RCD during the   test,   preventing their use.
Transformer impedances can also affect results, as the impedance close   to   source can
be very reactive rather than resistive. This is only a real issue when measuring close
to the source transformer, but the instrument resolution and accuracy becomes very
significant in this location.
Test   lead errors
Test leads can induce errors from:
to)
(b)
(C)
internal lead resistance,
contact   resistance of the probes or dips, and
internal fusing of the test leads.
As with the low resistance ohmmeter section earlier, the test lead resistance can be
'nulled' or may already be accounted for in the instrument. if   not,   the lead resistance
should be measured and deducted from future   measurement   values.
Contact resistance can add significantly   to   the circuit impedance
sharp and clips grip tightly.
ensure probes are
Fused leads can add significantly   to   lead resistance. A   500   mA fuse can add as much
as   1.8   Q   in a   test   lead pair. If fused leads are used for loop impedance testing they will
be need   to   be fused with higher rating fuses, typically   7   A   or 10   A   fuses,   to   prevent
the test   current   rupturing the fuse.
Leads compliant   to   the HSE document C538 should be adequate.
Instrument accuracy
Instrument resolution can compromise measurement accuracy, especially   at   the
lower loop impedances found near the source transformer. When measuring loop
impedances below   0.1   Q,   caution should be exercised in the interpretation of the
results, as the instrument accuracy significantly affects   measurement   values close to
the lowest end of the range.
For example: When attempting   to   measure a loop impedance of 003   Q,   an instrument
that declares a i5   0/0   _+3   digits on a digital display could give an answer between zero
and 0.06   Q   and be within its declared accuracy.
Instruments conforming   to   BS EN 61557-3 will fulfil the above requirements under
most situations.
These instruments may also offer additional facilities for deriving prospective fault
current.   The basic measuring principle is the same as for earth fault loop impedance
testers.   The   current   is calculated by dividing the loop impedance value into the nominal
mains voltage. Instrument accuracy is determined by the same factors as for Earth Fault
Loop Impedance   testers.   In this case, instrument accuracy decreases as scale reading
increases, because the loop value is divided into the mains voltage. It is important   to
112
Guidance note 3: Inspection   s.   Testing
o   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

note   these aspects, and the manufacturer's documentation should be consulted.
4.6   Earth electrode resistance testers
There are three general methods referred   to   in Chapter
ca)
(b)
cc)
method El, using a dedicated earth electrode   tester   (fall of potential, three- or
four-terminal type),
method E2, using a dedicated earth electrode   tester   (stakeless or probe type),
and
method ET, using an earth fault loop impedance   tester.
The most accurate of these is method El.
As mentioned in Chapter 2, method E2, the stakeless or probe tester,   cannot   be used
to   measure the resistance of a single earth electrode.
4.1   RCD testers
The trip times of RCDS are required to be verified, to ensure adequate disconnection
under fault conditions.
RCDs are tested by applying a test load   to   the RCD, inducing a calibrated   test   current
to flow in the Line-Earth circuit. This creates an imbalance in the Line-Neutral   currents
in the RCD and the device trips. The time it takes   to   trip is then displayed.
The   test   instrument should be capable of applying the full range of test   current   to   an
in-service accuracy as given in BS EN 61557-6. This in-service reading accuracy will
include the effects of voltage variations around the nominal voltage of the   tester.
The range of RCD operating currents supported is
and   1   A   - exceeding these limits presents severe
instrument design.
genera Ily limited   to   between 10   mA
design and   cost   implications   to   the
As with loop impedance testing, the Earth voltage is monitored and prevented from
exceeding the touch voltage limit, either 50   v   or 25   v,   depending on the requirements
of the location.
RCDS are usually tested   to   ensure:
(a)
(b)
(C)
they do   not   trip with fault   currents   less than 50
0/o of their operation rating,
they trip in the required time   at   fault current of 100   0/0   of their operational
rating, and
they t i p in the required time   at   fault current of 500   %   of their operational
rating.
In   addition   to   trip time testing, instruments offer the ability   to   test the RCD's tripping
current   threshold. For this   test,   a   RAMP   current   is applied from less than 50   %   of
the RCD rating   to   110 %. The   current   at   which the RCD trips is then displayed - this
identifies if the   RCD   is overly sensitive and may cause nuisance tripping.
Instruments conforming   to   BS EN 61557-6 will fulfil the above requirements.
Guidance note 3: Inspection & Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
113

4.8   Phase rotation instruments
BS EN 61557-7 gives the
phase sequence in
mechanical, visual and/or audible means.
requirements for measuring equipment for testing the
three-phase distribution   systems   whether indication is given by
BS EN 61557-7 includes requirements that:
(a)
(b)
(C)
(d)
(e)
indication shall be unambiguous between 85   0/o   and 110   0/0   of the nominal
system voltage or within the range of the nominal voltage and between 95   0/0
and 105   0/0   of the nominal system frequency,
the measuring equipment should be suitable for continuous operation,
the measuring equipment should be so designed that when either one or   two
measuring leads are connected   to   earth and the remaining measuring lead(s)
remain connected   to   their corresponding line conductors, the resulting total
current   to   earth should   not   exceed   3.5   mA runs,
the measuring equipment should   not   be damaged nor   should the user be
exposed   to   danger in situations where the measuring equipment is connected
to   120 0/0 of the rated system voltage or   to   120 0/'0 of its rated maximum
voltage range, and
portable measuring equipment should be provided with permanently attached
leads or with a plug device with live parts   not   accessible, whether plugged or
unplugged.
4.9   Thermographic equipment
Although thermographic surveying is   not   recognised by BS 7671 as a test instrument,
such equipment can be invaluable in assisting electrical inspections especially in the
early identification of possible points of overheating in circuits. Therefore some   notes
are included here on this   type   of equipment.   It   must,   however, be remembered
equipment must be operating and "thermally transparent" for a thermographic survey
to   be able   to   see   temperature   changes.
Important note: It is recommended that persons refer to the requirements of
the Electricity   at   Work Regulations   1989   and the HSE's guidance published
in   The Electricity   at   Work Regulations   1989   (HSR25), prior to undertaking
any work activity which places themselves or those under their control in
close proximity   to   live parts.
It   is relatively easy   to   make   arrangements   to   disconnect small installations such as   at
domestic premises from the supply   to   facilitate periodic inspection and testing.
However, as the size and complexity of an installation increases, isolation from the
supply becomes increasingly difficult. This is particularly   true   where continuity of
supply has health implications, as may be the case in hospitals and similar premises,
or financial implications as would be the case in banks, share-dealing and commodities
markets and the like. Nevertheless, it remains necessary   to   confirm the continuing
suitability of such installations for use. Therefore they   must   still be subjected   to   planned
and preventive maintenance or regular periodic   assessment   of their condition.
It may well be possible   to   carry   out   a thorough visual inspection of such installations
without subjecting the inspector or others in the building   to   any danger, and such an
inspection may identify many common defects caused by use/abuse. Furthermore,
experience of such installations may provide a valuable insight into commonly occurring
cases of wear and   tear.
114
Guidance Note 3: Inspection   s.   Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
I

Some defects though   cannot   be discovered by visual inspection alone. For example,
incorrectly tightened connections can result in a high resistance joint which can then
cause a high temperature   to   occur locally   to   the connection. If left uncorrected over
time further deterioration of the connection may well occur, leading   to   a continuing
increase in   temperature   which may subsequently present a risk of fire. This fire
risk will be significantly increased in installations where a build-up of dust or other
flammable materials can occur in close proximity   to   the source of heat.   It   should
also be remembered that increased heat   at   terminations can result in accelerated
deterioration of the insulation locally. Heating effects symptomatic of a fault or other
problem within an electrical installation can also occur as a result of cyclical-load
operations, use of conductors of inadequate current-carrying capacity, incorrect load
balancing and more mechanically related issues such as incorrect alignment of   motor
drive couplings and overtightened belt-drives.
A number of manufacturers offer infrared imaging equipment which can be used   to
identify such 'hot spots'. Infrared thermograph   works on the principle that all materials
emit electromagnetic radiation in the infrared region which can be detected by a
thermal imaging camera.
The   amount   of radiated energy detected can be presented in a readily usable form,
typically being shown as differences in colour that vary with the   temperature   being
detected. Figure   4.1   shows a colour/temperature correlation indicator such as those
that may accompany images. Such scales will aid the person ordering the inspection
or responsible for maintenance activities in their interpretation of the thermal images.
Guidance note 3: Inspection   a.   Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
115

v   Figure 4.1   A   colour/
correlation
In   terms   of visual inspection, the busbar connections in
Figure 4.2 appear   to   be satisfactory.
temperature
indicator
I
However, if the same connections are viewed   using   a
thermal imaging camera (Figure 4.3), it is evident that
the connections   to   the   centre   are running significantly
hotter than those   to   either side.
160.0
150.0
140.0
130.0
120.0
1T0.0
100.0
This higher   temperature   may indicate a loose connection
or connections, but in this case is probably due   to   the
centre   bar carrying a significantly higher   current   than
those   to   each side of it. As such, the person carrying
out   the inspection could   suggest   their client looks
into improving the load balancing of this   part   of the
installation.
I   I
<99.3'F
v   Figure   4.2
Bolted connections   at   a
busbar as seen by the eye
In   a further example, Figure 4.4 shows a   contactor   and
the thermal image has highlighted a potential loose
termination. After this was tightened Figure 4.5 shows
the result, with all three terminations now operating   at   a
much more uniform temperature.
Figure 4.3   Bolted
connections   at   a busbar
viewed using thermal
ma
Whilst the remedial work was being carried   out   it would
be sensible   to   inspect the insulation of the conductors in
the terminations to confirm that the insulation remained
effective and had   not   suffered significant damage.
g i g
The requirements   of the Electricity   it   Work Regulations
1989   must   be taken into   account   when considering the
use of thermographic surveying equipment as its use
may necessitate the temporary removal or bypassing of
measures that provide basic protection (as defined in
BS   7671),   such as opening doors   to   electrical panels and/
or the removal of barriers and covers. The requirements
of Regulation   14   (Work on or near live conductors),
which is reproduced as follows, are particularly pertinent:
v   Thermal image
of   contactor   showing
termination on right is too
hot
Figure   4.4
No person shall be engaged in any work activity
on or so near any live conductor   (other   than
one   suitably   covered   with   insulating   material
so as to prevent danger) that danger may arise
unless
(a)
v
(b)
Figure   4.5   Thermal image
of contactor after loose
termination has been
tightened
(C)
it is unreasonable in all the circumstances for it   to
be dead, and
it is reasonable in all the circumstances for him   to
be   at   work on or near it while it is live; and
suitable precautions (including where necessary
the provision of suitable protective equipment) are
taken   to   prevent   injury.
116
Guidance note   3:   Inspection & Testing
e The Institution of Engineering and Technology

The HSE's guidance on   the Electricity   at   Work   Regulotiorrs   l989(HSR25) recognises
that it may be necessary, in some circumstances, for conductors   to   remain live during
testing or diagnostic work. However, such work in close proximity   to   live conductors
may only be carried   out   if it can be done safely and if all precautions required   to   allow
it   to   be done so are put in place. Additionally, the work may only be performed by
persons who are suitably   competent   with regard   to   the   type   and   nature   of the work
activity being performed, as required by Regulation   is   (Persons   to   be   competent   to
prevent   danger or injury). HSR25 also makes clear that although live testing may be
justifiable it does   not   follow that there will necessarily be justification for subsequent
repair work   to   be carried   out   live.
Persons carrying out thermographic surveying should:
(B)
(b)
(C)
(do
(e)
(f)
(8)
have sufficient   competence   to   prevent danger and injury,
understand the   system   being worked on, the hazards that may arise as a result
of the work and the precautions that are required to   prevent   danger,
be able   to   identify those parts of equipment being inspected which are, or are
capable of being, live when the supply   to   the equipment is switched on,
implement all precautions required   to   prevent injury that have been identified
as part of the risk   assessment   for the work,
maintain the maximum possible distance from the live or potentially live parts
described above   at   all times,
maintain effective control of the area in which the equipment being inspected
is situated, and
ensure   that all protective   measures   which may have been affected by their
actions when carrying   out   the inspection work are fully reinstated. All guards
and barriers   must   be replaced and panel doors, lids and covers   must   be closed
and secured properly after the inspection is completed.
As   previously mentioned, thermographic inspection can be an effective method of
identifying potential defects that may   not   be identified by a more conventional visual
inspection. However, such thermal surveying should   not   be seen as a substitute for
periodic inspection and testing, but rather as an additional tool that can be used by
the inspector. Thermographic surveys can be a highly effective means of targeting
preventive maintenance   to   where it is   most   required. Defects identified may be factored
into the planned maintenance programme for the installation, or where necessary may
justify the remedial work being performed without delay.
Guidance note 3: Inspection & Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
117

118
Guidance   Note   3: Inspection   s.   Testing
o   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

This chapter provides guidance on completing the necessary schedules, certificates
and reports associated with inspection and testing. Sample certificates and report,
completed with typical entries, are provided together with sample   test   result schedules
and sample inspection schedules, again completed with typical results.
The chapter also contains some   notes   on completion of the forms, although helpful
information on this will also be gained by reading earlier chapters of this Guidance
Note.
5.1   Initial verification (inspection and testing) forms
Following the initial verification of a new installation or of an addition or alteration   to
an existing installation, an Electrical Installation Certificate is required   to   be completed
and issued together with inspection schedule(s) and   test   result schedule(s).
I»   Form   1   - Electrical Installation Certificate, EIC (three signatory version from
Appendix 6 of   BS   7671)
When an Electrical Installation Certificate is used, appropriate numbers of the following
forms are required   to   accompany the Certificate:
l>
>
Form 2   - Schedule of Inspections for domestic and similar premises with up to
100 A supply or a more extensive schedule where necessary   - (see below), and
Form 3 - Generic Schedule of Test Results.
642.3
Form 2 is not suitable for inspection of installations rated   at   more than 100 A or that are
more complex. For such installations the inspector will probably need   to   formulate their
own inspection schedules. These should be based on the requirements of Regulation
642.3 and the list of examples of items requiring inspection during initial verification,
given in Appendix 6 of BS   7671.
For completeness,   two   samples of typical completed Form   3s   (schedule of test results)
are included, one being for a single-phase installation and the other for a three-phase
installation.
Guidance note 3: Inspection   s.   Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
119

5.2   Minor works
The complete   set   of forms for initial verification (inspection and testing) may not
be appropriate for minor works. When an addition   to   an electrical installation does
not extend   to   the installation of a new circuit, the Minor Electrical installation Works
Certificate may be used. This one page certificate is intended for such work as the
addition of a socket-outlet or lighting point   to   an existing circuit, or for a repair or
modification   to   each circuit worked on Consequently, where three circuits are worked
on, for example, three Minor Electrical Installation Work Certificates would have   to   be
issued, or all of the work could be detailed on an Electrical Installation Certificate.
A Minor Electrical Installation Works Certificate   must not   be used for the replacement
of a consumer unit.
The Minor Electrical Installation Works Certificate (Form 4) is included and is taken
from Appendix 6 of BS 7671. Notes on completion and guidance for recipients are
provided with the form.
5.3   Periodic inspection and testing
The inspection and testing of an existing electrical installation is reported on using an
Electrical Installation Condition Report (EICR), see Form 5. And, just like with an EIC,
this document is issued with the appropriate number of Generic Schedule(s) of Test
Results (Form 3).
For periodic inspections the Schedule of Inspections for initial verification, i.e. Form 2,
should not be used but the dedicated model suggested in   BS   7671   as shown in Form
6, may be used for inspections of domestic installations and installations up   to   100 A.
For larger and more complex installations the inspector will need   to   formulate his/her
own inspection schedules. These should be based on the requirements of Regulation
642.3 and the list of examples of items requiring inspection for an Electrical Installation
Condition Reports, given in Appendix 6 of BS 7671.
120
Guidance   note 3:   Inspection   s.   Testing
o   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

..   .   .   .   ..   .   ..   .   ....   .   ..   .   .   .   ..   .
I
.. Pcrstco-de
DETAILS   OF THE CLIENT
Mr   D Roberts
23   Acacia   ve   be.   so   ETO   N   .SLCZQLT
3,
- .   .   .   -   |   .   .   ..   |   .   -   -   Q   .   .   .   .   ¢   -   »   -   . n   . -   4   -   .   l   .   .   ¢   -   1   -   »   -   -   |   . . -
.   u   *   I   u   A   I   A   a   n   s   u   h   »   I l l :   4   5   .   I   i   t   -
. f
'~51£,Lt»"°1H£e°fg§§3; rant
Sometawn   Bmsiness Park
SOMETOWN   postcode:   r
I
DESCRIPTION AND EXTEM OF THE   IMSTAI.LA11OI~l
instaffntfon to new 2. Floor   o{"Fice   builds
Description   of inslalationx
.
Complete   e ectrsca!
New installation   of
Extent o installation covered by this Cartier-cats:
Complete   eiectricoi   instMflation,   comprising   rennin   switchboard,
sub-main   and distribution   boards.   To   include all power   and
lighting circuits   but excluding   or-pork   iiglafring   -   which is
supplied Frown adjacent building.
see   continuation   sheet   No (Use continuation shoot if neoessa   I
A   :ldition to an
.
-:sting installation
|
Iteration to an
-Listing installation
FDR DESIGN
4   .
a
,.¢=~
l.   ~ ~ J .
b'We being the person{s} responsible for the design of   the   electrical instalalion (as inldioated by myfour signatures blow}, particulars
of which are described above, having exercised reasonable skill and cam when carrying out the design and addilionaly   where this
certificate applies to an addition or alteration, the safety of the existing insrtalatbn is not impaired, hereby CERTIFY that the
design work for which Use have been responsible   je   to   the best of myfour knowledge and belief in aocordanoe wth
'   -   if   *'~/.   detailed as follows: BS   7671:201B amended   to   2iQ1.8(date}   except   for the de
.
V I   13;   H Details of departures from BS 7671 (Regulations 120.3. 133.1
None
4   sassmentlsimntboaladtodbhis Caritas.
Details of   permitted   exceptions   (Regulation   411.3.3).
'*""'°°°°'
Norm
Risk   assessment   attached
'5l:l'it':et The extent of liability of the signatory or signatories is limited to the work de   above   as the subject of this Certificate.
"{Where there   is   mutual   responsibility for the design)
D. JONEQ
oaie.2""J""2"'**iiame (in BLOCK LETTERS)   .   Designer   No   1
l'\ltZl 2"' I
_ _
.   I Date   l Name (IN BLOCK   LEIITERS)   Designer
For the DESIGN of the installation:
D Jones
N/5
Signature:
Signature;
FOR CONSTRUCTION
I being the person responsible for the construction of the electrical instalation (as indicated by my signature below), particulars d
which are described   above,   having exercised reasonable skill and care when carrying out the construction hereby CERTIFY that   the
construction work for which I   have been   responsible   is   to   the best   of my knowledge   and   belief in accordance witll BS 76712018.
amended to2.Q18(date) except for the departures, if any, detailed es follows
Details of departures from BS 7671 (Regulations 120.3 and 133.5):
F   .
.   .   '. 5
i"   subject of this Gsrtificate   . (   .. The extent of liability of the signatory is limited   to   the work described
For CONSTRUCTION of the installation:
.   Constructor
T.   SMITH Date:   20/02/&0E%8 T   Smr'f:k
Name   (IN   BLOCK   LETTERS}: Signature:
FOR INSPECTION   a   TESTING
I   being   the person responsible for the inspection & testing of the electrical installation   (as   indicated by my signature   below)   particulars
of which are described   above,   having   exercised reasonable skll and care when carrying out the inspection &   testing hereby   CERTIFY
that   the   work   for which I   have   been responsible is to the best of my knowledge and belief in accordance with BS 76?1 :2[l1B,   amended
to2.f218(date) except for   the   departures, if any, metaled as follows:
Fw'   I   1
~ns
120.3 and 133.5): Details of departures from BS   T
None
H   if
.
certificate   .
Ins   clot
The extant of liability of the sign.   .   to   the work described above as the subject
For INSPECTION AND TESTING of he installation:
G Wilson
.   1   .   |   .   .   ,   ,   q   -   ,   .   -   q   -   .   u v -   I -   |   : Date:   .z¢:>/1:22/z¢21 s   Name (IN BLOCK LE1-rERSl   G.   wILson Signature
5
HEXT INSPECTION
IMe the designefls), recommend that this instalation is further inspected and tested after an interval of not more than . .   ..
yearsfmonlhe-
5.4   Model forms for certification and reporting
ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION CERTIFICATE
(REQUIREMENTS   FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS   -   BS 7671 [IETWIRING REGULATlONS]}
Form 1 No.
555515
;2.
Page 1   Of
Guidance note 3: Inspection & Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
121

PARTICULARS OF SIGNATORIES TO THE ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION CERTIFICATE
Jovfmgs
Company .   a   l   l   I   I   l   l   . L A
l   l   r   1   i   r   1   1   .   .   l   .   1 - 1 1 1 1
»   -
_
-   1   4
.
.   I   l   l   I   l   l   .   .   .   . a l   .
.
.   . . . 1 1 1 1 1   r
n o
Designer (No 1}
p
N   ..
A8?I;,   .25   H   Street
SQM   OWN
4
I   I   I   .
1 1   l   I   l   l   l   1   r   1   1   l   .   l   1   r   I   I
1
-   4   -   h   .   ~   -   -   .   -   a l   -   D   A
I   I   I   I - I   I   I   .   .   l   .
i l - 1   u   I   r   l   n   n   r   l   -   1   .   .   l   1
v
»   4 -   -   1   1   -   1   - --   -   »   --   -- Postcode
_.The   Electrical Design   Partnarshxp
SLILO   OYY1el   No   01000 q q q q q q
* Company:
Designer (Ho 2)
(if applicable)
.
.   .
.
.
Nana
Address
Postcode:
Constructor
Mane
Address .   -   b   e   i   n   I n   L I   b   e   A n n a   l   b   ..   b e   .   I   I   d   b
»
_
Tel No:
T   Smith
t   E(   t
'
Ur\J'f
8a,   Somefown I-?£i°§¥'8?3f   ofgtne
ec rocs
SQMETGWN   Postcode.   51.5   QXX.   Tel   no.   01000   882888
r
Y   I   n   .   -   u   s   1   1   .   - , . . - , , i v .   q   .   ,   .   -   1   1   -   -
»
l   -   4   1   »   A   »   »   A a n   s s a s n   n a s s e r   l   b   I   l   l
J   I   I   s   I   I   I   .   I   i   l   l   I   I   l   l
I
- u   .   . . ,   . . -   - -
n   a   a   n   s   s   l   u   n   a   a   h   i   i   l   b   l   l   d   l   b   l   l   d
4
I   I .   I   I I   I
Inspector
I   I I   I L   A   a *   I   4 Electrics I L   Company   Co (mtg
r   I   |   1   .   r   l   1   1
a   L   I
. r   I   I   ..   I   1   1   . .   I
Name
Address*
77.7 O   igloo   777
.   u   r   r   l   l   r   r   r   l   1 1   F   r   i   . 1 » l 1 r 1   I   u   a
Postcode:   .SLY.   Qi/JV*/Tel   No
G
.
Wilson
1,   Crabtree   Row
SOMETOWN
5
I-   I   .   . 1 1 .   .   l   s o   l   .   .   l   l   l   .   ..   I   .   I   .
r   -   1   1   1   1   1   1   P   Y   '   1   v   r   1   l   1   r   l   l   1   l   r   1   i   .   .   .   1   l   l   ¢   1 - l l r 1   v i   1   1
SUPPLY CHARACTERISTICS AND EARTHIHG ARRANGEMENTS
Earthing
arrangements
Number and Type of Live
Conductors
Nature of Supply Parameters   Supply Protective Davici
-
T   N C
T N   '".
TN C S   Er
TT
IT
9
n.
M
AC
1 -phase.   2-wire
2   phase, 3-wire
3   phase.   3-wire
3 phase 4-wire
-
DC
2-UWB
3-wie
Other
I
»   I   n   »
Nominal voltage,   u   r   u.,"*4Q<2A2.§O V
Nominal frequency, f!"   SQ Hz
Prospective fault   current,   I,,,f2'   1-S kA
External bop   impedance, Ze!'2"
O-R?   Q
(Moles TJ'   Br   HHQUW
(2) by snquiy orbs mealsuwsmant)
'..
.   L   .   I
ES (EN)
Type   ...type   U
Rsltedwrrenl   A
|   I Confirmation d su   warily
Other   sources d supply   (as   detailed on attached   schedule)
PARTICULARS OF INSTALLATION REFERRED TD   lu   THE CERTIFICATE
Means of Earthlng
at' Elialributor's facility
Installation earth
8160(1'0d6
Maximum Demand
50.-k*1f*,'
Amps
Dden as wwwniw
l   A 13   L1
w
'1.   To N'   and (load)
I   1   1   o   I   I
I   I   .   .   |   .   I
*   I   I   .   A.   .
Details of Installation Earth   Electrode (where appricabde)
Type   (e.g.   rod{s),   tape   etc)   N / A
Location   N / A
Emenuaa resistance   [D   Earth   N / A   .   n
Main Protective Conductors
Earthing conductor   csa .r   I Material   n   .a   or,   16 - r   - -   -   .   _   -
2
mm   .1 Connection   I   czontinuity verified
Main protective bonding
conductors
'Jo extraneous-conductive-paris)
csa Marberid   a .   4   Q _
-   s e   I   *   I   I   -   -   1 16
2
mm Copser   E( Connection   I   continuity verified
|   :   :   L' To water installation   pi   1 - |   -   0   To alruciural steel To   s   installation   pipaa   To oil installation pi   s
To lightning   protection   SP¢Cif3'   • To other
Malri Swltch I Switch-Fuse I Clrcult-Bruaker   I   RCD
I   I   I   I
I   I   I   I
L   I   4   *   I   I   L   A n n .   A   .
Location   Main   $w1'tF:hronm
..adjac.ent   rrecephan   area
BS(EN)   60947-5
No of poles   4
Cun'ent rating   .,'L1QQ.A
Fuse   I   device   rating or setting   N.ZA.A
Voltage rating   .4-DlQ.'v'
If RCD mlill   llIrll:r:h
g -   -   »   - -
1   1   1   I   |   I   r
. .   1   r   . .
Rated residual operating current (lm) N/A   nM.
Rated time delay   N/A   ms
Measured operating time   NJA   ms
*   * A   I   l b ; 4 4 1 »   I l l !   a n - A   I   n
. 1   .   l   .   l   .   .   .   r   l   1 .
COMMENTS DN EXISTING INSTALLATIDN   (in   the case of   an   addition   or alteration see Regulation   644.1 .2):
...Not   ap.pI¢'¢.leI2I@..
*
s c
r   l   v i   l .J-   1   Schedules of Test Results are attached.
SCHEDULES
The attached Schedules are part of this document and Ihls Gerliiicale is valid only when they are attadwed   to   it.
Schedules of   Inspections   and
[Enlsr   quaniies   of   schedujos   atlachod).
Fo4Tn 1 No
555515
xi
Page2   o f .   .
ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION CERTIFICATE
NOTES FOR FORM   I   (from BS 7671)
1   The Electrical Installation Certificate is   to   be used only for the initial certification
of a new installation or for an addition or alteration   to   an existing installation
where new circuits have been introduced or a consumer unit changed. It is   not
to   be used for a Periodic Inspection and Test, for which an Electrical Installation
Condition Report form should be used. For an addition or alteration which does
not   extend   to   the introduction of new circuits, a Minor Electrical Installation
Works Certificate may be used.
The 'original' Certificate is   to   be given   to   the person ordering the work (Regulation
644.I). A duplicate should be retained by the   contractor.
122
Guidance   Note 3:   Inspection   a.   Testing
o   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

2
5
4
I
tulle
5
6
This Certificate is only valid if accompanied by the Schedule of Inspections and
the Schedule(s) of Test Results.
The signatures appended are those of the persons authorized by the companies
executing the work of design, construction, inspection and testing respectively.
A signatory authorized   to   certify more than one category of work should sign in
each of the appropriate places.
The time interval recommended before the first periodic inspection must be
inserted.
The proposed date for the   next   inspection should take into consideration the
frequency and duality of maintenance that the installation can reasonably be
expected   to   receive during   ts   intended life, and the period should be agreed
between the designer, in   rand other relevant parties.
The   page   numbers   for   each of   the   Schedules   of   Test   Results   should be
indicated, together with the total number of sheets involved.
The maximum prospective value of fault   current   llpf) recorded should be the
greater of either the prospective value of short-circuit   current   or the prospective
value of earth fault   current.
CUIDANCE FOR RECIPIENTS (to be appended to the Certificate)
This safety Certificate has been issued   to   confirm that the electrical installation work   to
which it relates has been designed, constructed, inspected and tested in accordance
with British Standard 7671 (the IET Wiring Regulations).
You   should have received an 'original' Certificate and the   contractor   should have
retained a duplicate. If you were the person ordering the work, but   not   the owner
of the installation, you should pass this Certificate, or a full copy of it including the
schedules, immediately   to   the owner.
The 'original' Certificate should be retained in a safe place and be shown   to   any person
inspecting or undertaking further work on the electrical installation in the future. If
you later   vacate   the   property,   this Certificate will demonstrate   to   the new owner that
the electrical installation complied with the requirements of British Standard 7671
at the time the Certificate was issued. The Construction (Design and Management)
Regulations require that, for a project covered by those Regulations, a copy of this
Certificate, together with schedules, is included in the project health and safety file.
For safety reasons, the electrical installation will need   to   be inspected   at   appropriate
intervals by a skilled person or persons,   competent   in such work. The maximum time
interval recommended before the   next   inspection is stated on Page l   under 'NEXT
INSPECTION'.
This Certificate is intended   to   be issued only for a new electrical installation or for new
work associated with an addition or alteration   to   an existing installation. lt should   not
have been issued for the inspection of an existing electrical installation. An "Electrical
Installation Condition Report" should be issued for such an inspection.
This Certificate is only valid if accompanied by the Schedule of Inspections and the
Schedule(s) of Test Resu Its.
5
Guidance note 3: Inspection   a.   Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
123

ITEM
NO
DESCRIPTION
Outcome
See Note 2
1.0   DlSTRIBUTOR'S f SUPPLY INTAKE EQUIPMENT   (visual   Inspection only)
1.1   Service cable
1_2   Sew be head
1 8   Earthing arrangement
1.4   Meter tails
1.5   Metering equipment
r
1.6   isolator (where   p ¢ e n t )
2.0   PARALLEL OR SWITCHED ALTERNATIVE SOURCES OF SUPPLY
2.1   Adequate arrangements where   a   generating   set   operates as a switched alternative to the public supply (551   .6)
N / A
2.2   Adequate   arrangements   where a   generating   set   operates   in   parallel   with the   public   supply (551 .7)
N / A
3.0   AUTOMATIC DISCONNECTION OF SUPPLY
3.1
C
* Presence and adequacy of earthing and protective bonding arrangements
_ .2.1,542.1.2_2) -   Distributor's earthing arrangement (542 1
.r
. lnstalation earth   electrode   (where   applicable)   (542. 12.3)   J
Earthing onnMcior and connections, including accessibility (542.3 543.3.2)
|   I
. Main protective bonding conductors and   connections,   including accessibility   (411.3.1.2,   543.3.2;   544.1)
I
.»
Provision of safety electrical earthing I bonding   labels at   all appropriate locations (514.13)
.»   RCD(s) provided   for fault   protection (411.4.9, 411.5.3)
N / A
4.0
4.1
BASIC PROTECTION
Presence and adequacy of measures to provide basic protection (prevention   of contact with live parts]
within the installation:
1)
-
Insulation of live   parts   e.g. conductors completely covered with durable insulating rrraterial (416.
-
Bankers   or   enclosures   e.g. oorna-ci   IP rating   (4162)
5.0   ADDITIONAL PROTECTION
5.1   Presence and effectiveness   of additional protection   methods:
-RCD(s) not exceeding 30 mA operating current (415.1; Part 7). see Item 8.14   of this   schedule
-Supplementary bonding   (415,2; Pan   7)
6.0   OTHER METHODS OF PROTECTION
6.1   Presence and effectiveness of methods which gM   both basic and fault protection:
FCP   an
-
SELV   system,   including the   so   d assudated circuits   (Section   414)
N / A
H
-
PELV system,   including the www   "d associated circuits (Section 414)
N / A
-   Double or reinforced insulation   l.e.   ulase   II or   equivalent   equipment   and   associated circuits (Section 412)
N / A
-   Electrical separation for one   item   of   equipment   e,g. shaver   supply   unit   (Section   413)
N A
7.0   CONSUMER UNlT(S) f DISTRIBUTION BOARDIS):
?.1   Adequacy of   access and working   space for   items   of electrical   equipment including switdlgear (1   $32.12)   ¢
7.2   Components   are suitable according   to   assembly manufacturers instructions or literature (536.4.203)   x
n
7.3   Presence   of   linked main switd1(s) (462.1.201)   x
7.4   isolators,   for every circuit or group of circuits and all items of   equipment   (4622)
7.5
»
4   v   J (416.2; 421 1 6 421-1.201, 5265) Suitability   of enciosure{s} brlPandlira   ratings
SCHEDULE   oF   INSPECTIONS   (for new installation work only)   for
DOMESTIC   AND SIMILAR PREMISES WITH UP TO   100   A SUPPLY
For 2 Nu.
555513
f3
NOTE 1:   This form is suitable for many types of smaller   installation,   not   exclusively domestic.
All items inspected in order   to   confirm, as appropriate, compliance with the relevant clauses in BS 7671.
The list of items and associated examples where given are   not   exhaustive.
NOTE   2: Insert J   to   indicate an inspection has been carried   out   and the result is satisfactory,
or NRA   to   indicate that   the   inspection is   not   applicable   to   a particular item.
.l"
I
I
.r
Page   3   of   S
124
Guidance   note   3:   Inspection & Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

ITEM
NO
DESCRIPTION
Outcome
See Note 2
CONSUMER   unlr{s}   z   DISTRIBUTION BOARIJ(S) continued
7.6   Protection   against   mechanical   damage where oabbs enter equipment   {522.8.1,   522.a.5,   522.B.11   )
7.?   Confirmation that   ALL conductor connections are   correctly   located in terminals and are light and   secure   (526.1)
7   B   Avnirlanoe of healing effects where cables enter ferromagnetic enclosures e.g. steel   (521 .5)
7.5¢   411 .5, ElL'
41   *..
in   of   corral   type and ratings d   circuit protective   devices for cwercurrent   and fault protaclicln {411.3.2, 411.4,
'-lections 432,   433. 53T.3. 1 .1 I   /
mo   Prcsen   ca of appropriate circuit charts, wamlng and cfthar notlcaa:
*   Provision   of oircuil charts schedules or equivalent forms   of information (51-4.9)
-   Waming   notice of   method of isolation where   live   parts   not enfeeble of being iodated by a single device   {514.11   )
• Periodic   inspection   and   testing   notice {514.12.1 J
* RCD six-monthly test   notice,   where   required (514.12.2)
.   AFDD   six-monthly   tes!   notice, where required
L
.   Wamhg notice of non-standard (mixed) colours up   conductors   present   (514.14)
N / A
7.11   Presence of labels   lo   indicate the purpose art switdngear and   protective   devices   [514.1.1,   514.8}
8.0
L
CIRCUITS
8.1
L
Adequacy of conductors for   current-carrying capacity'   with regard to type and nature of the instalation (Section 523   }
8.2   Cable insulation methods suitable for the bcalion(s) and external influences (Section 522)
8.3   Band II Segregatiordsepalation of   Band I   (ELF) and   (LV)   circuits,   and elactricd   and   nonelacztrical sawioes (528)
N / A
84   Cables oorrecly eroded and supported throughout indudirig escape   routes,   with protection against abrasion   (Sections
521,   522}   J
8.5   Provision of hrs banana, sealing arrangements where necessary (5212)
8.6   Non-sheathed   cables   enclosed   throughout   in   conduit,   ducting or   trunking   (521.10.1, 526.8)
N / A
8.7   Cables concealed   under floors,   above   ceilings   Cr   in walsJpartitbns. adequately   protected   against damage   {522.6.20t
522.62025 522-6.204)   J
B.B   Conductnnns correctly   identify   by   color,   lettering or numbering   (swim   514)
8-9   Presence,   adequaqr and correct mrmlnatlon   or   prnlnactive conductors   (411 .3.1 .1;   543.1 )
J
B.1D   Cables and conductors correctly cionnudnd. andoead and with no undue mechanical   strain   {Section 526)
8.11   l'\llDb¢BdC   insulation of a r:ondu::tor visible outside   enclosure (52613)
B.12   Single--pole devices for switching or protection in line corwduclnols only {132.14. 1,   530.3.3. 643.6)
8.13   Acmoessories not damaged. securely fixed, ccirrecily   connected,   suitable inf external influences (12-4.1.1, 512.2, Section 526)
B.14   Provision of additional protection by RCD not exceeding 30mA'
.
Sodcet-outlets   rated   at   32 A or   less,   unless   exempt   (411 .3.3)
\/
.
Mobile   equipment   with a current   rating   not   exceeding   32 Aior use outdoors [411.3.3}
Cables concealed   in   walls at a depth of less   than 50   mm {522.B21J2. 522.6.203)
• Cabins ounoaaled in walls 1   partitions   containing   metal parts regardless   of depth   (522.6,202; 522.6.203}
.3.4) -   Foal nicuib   supplying   Iuminaires within domestic {hmndldd)   premises   (411
N / A
aus   correct Present: of lpproprlate devices fur isolation and   swit-.zhng   tly located indudlng :
". .   -J   . :_ .
Means of   srudtching   of! for mechanical maintenance (454
-   Emergency switches (565,1, 537.:3*3)
N / A
53»'.". »   Fur°l.':1bfld switdwes, for   4::fJntrd   Of pans of the instalatinn and current-using equipment (463.1 .   1)
-|   F'l;lhtarls   switches {53?.4»)
N / A
9.0   CURRENT-USING EQUIPMENT [PERMAHENTLY CONNECTED]
g.1   table for external influences (134. 1.1, 416.2, 51z.2) Equipment net damaged, securely fixed
9.2   Provision of werinad andlor   undenreltage   prete~r.:tien   e.g. for   rotating   madwinee.   or   required   (Sections   445. 552   }
9.3   Installed 1a mirimizs Me buid-up of heat and restrict the spread of lira (421.   1.4,   559.4.1   }
9.4   Adequacy crfworking space. Accessibiiw to equipment   (132.12;   513.1 )
J
10.0   LOCATION{S} CONTAINING A BATH   OR   SHOWER   {SECTION 701)
10.1   30 mA RCD protection for all LV circuits.   equipment   suitable for   the   zones,   supdementery   bonding   (where   required)   etc.
11.0   OTHER PART   7   SPECIAL INSTALLATIONS OR LOCATIONS
11.1   If any, List   al   other special insldlaliuns or lclcaibns   present,   `   (Record separately the results of particular inspections app-ed)
N / A
Form2 No
555515
kg
Inspected   by:
N   ante   (Capitals)   Signature   G   Wilson
Page   of
125
|,
I
Guidance note 3: Inspection & Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology

* 1
4»   |-
v
.
.
.
I
u p   w   I   Vu
* :
u   : u
.
.
I
.
I
I
.
.
.
4
\
2
E
g
3
§
.
g.§
""4-1
TIE
5%
= §
3
_
sea
So
-ES
8
:
B
.so
m
E
m
. o
§
T:
.:   .:
~:   t g
3
c
m
so
§.§
cm.
'as
E   2 8
--
_;~=*
Q   3
£ .E1§~"
E   3 m 3 m
c.JEI.uml.u
I
•
*
• I
1
•
I
1'
1-
v
4- I
4-
1
* v
'p
* 1°
*
*
*
* 1°
*
* +
9
I
* 4-
"   v I
•
*
* 1°
Y
* A
T
Q
1
*
1
Q
* ¢
* 7
1
* ¢
Q
Q
0
* 5
Q
7
1
A
T
1'
t 4
* Q
Q
*
- Q
t
1
* ¢
Q
Q
1
* 5
Q
1
A
*
- 9
t
*
* 9
1
Q
a
* »
9
r
4
4
-r I
*
*
* 1
I
+
* 1
•
*
* v
* 4
-1- i
* -r I
*
* v
U
O
* 1
•
* +
v
* +
1
i
* -r I
*
* v
U
4
* 1
f
* +
v
*
* 1
•
* 1
I
.
.
.
4
4
1°
v
* 1
* v
I
* 1'
i
* 1°
1
* 1°
v
*
c
no
.:
3
3,
m
E
N
'u
2
.is
.Q
E
0   1-
E
'_
3   5
'E
g
E   _§
.n
:   ..\-;
5   .a
3
r
E
.s
.E   1:
-'Q
~§
E
m
.g   >~
Q   at
'a   m
"5
é'   E'
*Eli
D B
g *
I
I
i
.
. l __
.
l
l
l _
.
.
1 _
_
.
.
. l
g   'S
. _
1
* . _ 'we
a
_
*
.
* l
*
-H
" a s
m
N
.:
o.
;
<1
#_
e&§
3§gmE
229
E a - -
'E
e
&
n
4:
E
. i i
; s
6   §
5 5 8 3
a § § §
3 2 m m
on
3
'   D   D
E
2 3 4 8 8
§
:|
'Ill'
as
s.
-1-1
as
cu
|_
3
?é
cg
Q   :
E
2
E
8
_'Q   31
g
m
<11
Cr:
i t
:
§
IG
'Q
3
5%
-81
*Q
Q
2
2
4-1
s
O
no
'E
q
§
n.
.§
so.
Q _'E
.2"
-G
'Q
:L
go
3
.4->
3
.g
u
-E
§
'c
3
5
.E
Q
44
m
3
'u
as
-to
o
'I-5
3
q_
Q
2
Q
n
g
g
.a
.g
s
l
g
,g
1*_
Q
z
.o
-B
*J
'2
c
Q
*J
'a
E
-
+5
8:
E
u
:s
2
UP
é
.s
E
F
'E
3
*J
.L
a
'E
.§
4-J
'n
'g
E
Q
g
§
G
'Q
§
2
g
.so
E
2
-g
:Q
,q
*s
S
E
a
Q
g
L.
g
3
o
I
'd
.g
q
3
G
3
3
1
-E
2
L
n
-E u
:s
*a
3
-'E
E
*e
*J
3
Q
E
3
§
§
3
3
's
L
_g
+-v
'in 3
E
.g
8
q
*J
Q
uogwado   uolnnq
F*
1591   GGAV   lenuer,l
x   x   x x   x   \   \
D
Q
u:
uogeJedc»
:ii
U0lllnq 1591 Goa
X   \   x   \   x   \   x
(so) aug*'
uogoauuoosgg
on
N
~9
FP:
iN
N
+
1q
Cr
N
in
l'l"l
H
in
*~I=IS3.
1   -
on pamsealu
Lunw!xew
*'t C)
!":
Q
l
II
Q
I
'*T
Q
UP
m
N
Q
m
01
92
H
M.u2l0d
Q
Ir"-
\   x   x   3   x   \   X
E
2
:
E
§ §
- § as
Cr;
WEB - and
on   u
Q-
N
.
u-
N
+
11
u-
N
+
\
u-
N
+
\
Q'
N
+
21
1:-
N
+
l
G'
N
Be   -
8*!122
\
q-»
N
+
\
o-
N
1
or
N
+
\
Cr
N
+
\
Cr
N
+
\
'a~
N
+
In
Q-
N
+
8EBHOA   159i
90u€lswau uDn21n'==ul
A -   3
In
S
iN
g
UP
3
iN
3
UP
8
U1
a
UP
21-
fu
-E   i
in'
E
§S§,
41.)
TO
C
'4-
.at
:
c
"g
Cl)   c:
5 8 "
co:
:ez
§
'E
as ,_
=a
5.
z
5.
2
5.
z
.5
z
15
z
<
\
2
:s
2
(nu   + »u)""
H
`*1 Q
H
*i Q
in
*
.
Q:
~sa»
"
.
Q,
a
<~i
N
un
|--
"'? H
(:>d:,»)¢1"
*
Q
H
q
1:-R
1-
"E Q.
if
z
_-5
2
If
2
If
2
(leJnnau)"Js2
*Q
CJ
"Q
Q   QS
If
z
If
z
~15
2
~'i'£
2
(Buy)   U
l
H
'q
\
N
4)
A.
1-
l
q
s
S
z
:s
z
l
5.
2
l
go
2
I   I   I   I   I   I   I
(zUJU-1)   ado
:
'-'Q
H
*Q
1-11   "2 vi
IQ
N
q
1-1
q
H
q
H
I
Q
( i i BMC
'Q
N   "2 N
*'!
N
Q
~n
!'!
ii   'Q 241
!-'!
H
I
pmgayq
an
ac+ua1a}a1»:l   § § §   §   §   §   §
I
(.u) *z Wmwad
an
uJnuJqxeln
l"-
ii)
-x
r-
"E
-s
r-
"I to
l~..
"? vi
m
of
r-
in
of
I*
no
to
I*
I
Pa
us;
(kw) IGOH
Q
an
Q.
If!
Q
in
Q
IQ
Q
in
Q
in
Q.
an
I
(Vu) Mwvdw '°
Eul>lealq
-s>   \9
~n
41
~o   ~n
\9
I
In
to) Bugs:
N
in
N
on
N
in
N
10   ~.o
0
'Q
I
Adm'   on   in   on   in   m   in   in   I
n
(no)   is
In
§
I
3
U'
§
I
§
"-l
1
§
'a-
§
I-
§
~a
I
DJ
c
.Q
E.
°:
0
of;
Q
5
5
E
2
3 _g
n
u
.x
Q
ca
'P
.§
I
.Q
s
u
n.
3
v1l
'D
nm
.be
*J
o
Vu
.
cc
+
c
no
-S U
-'E
-=I*
2"
cc
r
2
u
.-u
.x
I
1.
we
.ac
Q
Q
.Q
§
3
,g
I
:E
.or
.g
a
:L
i'
Vi
G
L
go
lu-
I
-B
.z
-E
-.I
2
q
so.
m
r
1   -
1aquJnu   ;!no1!g   H   N   in   q-   IN   \9 1~..
of
I
I
| .
l
I
I
£ u ~
- H a
' Q s
'
¢
E   q
m
;5é
i   g
:
Q
s
O
:   l-
en   a
.   Q
E
:
es   I
E.
.
51.   II
2
'S   Q..
E
a   in
§   E   g,
Q   CO   ._
I-   z   m
in'
.S
:D
u
::
:
u
.u.
u
m
-
S
GJ
o
B
U
:
'D
c
o
LJ
.8
S
m
'U
.g
E
E
D.
E
UT
FI
.
NO
H:
'E
ID
as
on
m
[L
o'
2
FO
*E o
LL
2
E
E
8
E
Q
E
s
-3
2
_g
3
§
g
§
s
et
E
:
o
':-
L'
To
*.| an
.:
g
3
2.
3
3
3
2
a
§
E
§
E
S
-
(D
|-
.J
D
GD
u.l
ac
|-
(D
u.l
|-
l.l.
o
g
IJJ
.J
:
D
l.u
I
O
in
o
_
nr
l.u
z
l.Ll
0
§
3
s
in
E
:-
o
u.
m
an
fl
.:
a.
2
no
.:
in
IU
u
-.E
an
:
:
m
GI
as
- m
Cl
I-
*
o
.2
:
'u
m
.:
u
U1
u
':
0
c
GJ
U
g
2
g
g
126
Guidance Note 3: Inspection & Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
vi
.Q

1
•
1
9
1
1
1   <£
E*
Q.   m
U
g
.E
.85   ..
* § = =
£.E§l3
m
§£'3€¢8
'E
.3
E
E
§
m
.Q
'E
.
to
Qui
'
* Q § _ ; . - , g g g g
23
8
§   g
BQ
-5.2   2
`   -H   :
$ 8   bE
:
= §
E
8 5 3 1 3
c
.E
3
m
m
c
= u
2
_m
.n
E
_g
:
:-
'E
g
.E-
:
o
m
. I
1
|
.
.
I
r
.
.
go
q
u   z
* U
D
* •
• I
U
U
I
U
U
U
• t
'p
U
U
I
1
•
* U
'I
•
* •
I
I
Q
• D
* U
•
I
•
I
1
I
'r
'u
E
a
.E
la
'u
s
£
:
_g
"6
.n
'55
as;
in
- :
m
E
1;
m
I'-
-E
g
Q -
32-
mgg§
g;
, r = . _
QE
§.
8
vi
Cn
*L>
ac
141
CO
'L> Ur
O
L
'is
if
`a
'H
= .:
u
L
~'E
.:
5*
+
31
O
L
4_1
0
:s
q
(
Q
<.:
et
'L
E
'n
4:
a
a
z
L
Q
:ve
*5
x.
q
4-
31
<5
L
4-0
0
:s
a
EI
EE
8
2
m
Q
:J
of
1
o
u.
*s
.1
'La
1:
8
up
Ra
>
q
a.
Q
.1
=.»
a.
q
4-
In
<5
L
-L#
u
is
3
Q
uoqeuado unmnq
2
1-591 CIGAV lenuew
x   x   x x   x   x   x   x   x   x
§
uogesedog
U01-Inq was GSH
x   x   x
`>
\   x   x   \   x
I
(so) 9uJ!1*'
U'U!F39lJll00"5!U
'N
In
N
1-Pa
I   I
1-1
Lf)
I
H.
iN
Q
m
O
UP
I
DCI
of;
-x
'r'4.
UT
Q
on
'is H
m
*Q
.'-\
H
co
O
Q
*
.
-s
r-
'in
1-1
Q
pamseau
-'G
l.I.ll"IUJ!XE?H
0:
CO
°'!
'O
I   I
*E
Q
Rluvl0d
r
c"'~.l
\   x   x   x   x   x   x   x   \   x
_5§,..
g 3cz
g o ;
-at:
Ll;l1eg-eul.rl
Q;-
O`
N
al;
\
g-
N
+
\
'T
N
+
\
1:-
N
+
'\
Cr
N
+
\
o-
N
.|,_
\
u-
N
+
\
o-
N
51
o-
N
+
\
*U*
N
+
(J-
N
+
§
s
q~
N
\
cs-
N
+
\
q-
N
\
U'
N
+
1
ur-
N
+
\
u-
'H
+
I
u-
N
\
cs-
N
+
\.
U'
N
+
CO
4
1.
re,
.,_
.J
J'   `x
0
I*.
|.
.
A
J
(*-
|.
.
§
§.   I
Q
Q
iN
C!
KJ
I   »-,
FE
5;
I
,   I
QT
9**l'l'9*'4'I
a5e140A 1931
SOI-l9t9!9°EI   wuemul
r
,_
A
.g.+
- p a
i s
if
E
.:
E
8
Q
Q
_   :
m.=
i
*   o
22:
E ' :
.Q
0
F
=u
<
E
.
_,r
* w
|- .'___
.r"
°-4_
_.f
Q
1 |
J   '
-r - 1 .
_1,
g
-
<
"°..
2
-41
SE
-=r
\
z
-<
F
4
I
/'
_f
*~4_
(2
u+*u)'
'ii
~=!
Q
1-1
'J r~~ .
L
(\~   '-1
p - _
r   .
[r~"..
no
q
H
4 'al an
ii
H
"?
Q
J?
r-l
'-1
i
1
C   .
O-1
(mm:
H
et
H
-»"'
'!"-l_
1-.
1-
.l"r"
-4"
`-:_
___.
*4.
-"-1.
..r`
`   |
1'
.quo .-"' "'|..
.   '
»~-4
- 4
T
l"
I..-'-..
<
\.
z
<
m.
2
<1
* 1
-<1 'ii
j»
*.
To
_~4
,»*   .
x
-v
¢ _
T' 4   .
<1
-v
'_
<
tleunvul
"JO
q
Cs   HL   .
-r'
`\. .
1   .   <:
*-.
z
-c °~.,»..
2
l
(EH-!l)
u
or
'Q
5.
-55
l
<1
*--_
_p
'~.
' ~.f*»
. Q
CJ
<
" ` \ .
`I'
-r_._
of
2?
(.
`-3
\
in
.<1
O   al
-< \   \
.7
'Ls   I   I
(zulLu}   odd
::
'ft
*
'G H-1
UP
,-4
--f`l
f
A
I I
\   I
Ln   in
1--4
In
-1
LP)
\-1.
I
x-1
(aww) 8Arl
2
q
*
Q
't
l.,»~
C"4.
-f`l
<~i
Q
-+-
f~»
"4
1   .. *H ~J
VH
Q   O
1-+-
+
LJ
N
pmngwm
auuanyag
m m   m
-1:
m
x
"K   \J   I   en   UQ   <   I
h
in
LU)
°z
PHHI1 U1IBd   °
Lurlwpnnyq
r~
on
.
I-\
I*-
m
_
1~.,
1q
l
l'*
sq
1-i
["\.
*\*`l
l
l~..
n _   6,
"1
f*~`
T
l
I
(vi)
""|
mu
ca
n
I   I
Q
an
I
Q
an
I
Q
n
Q)
ta
I
a
(vi) Axwretfvtr
51 JI QSH]   3 58   3   3   3   3
I
S
(2)
'pi
'Q
H
I
.1
(v
` |   E'Jl1CJ   'N
in
N
in   a
~s
*
'N
in   3   3
I   N
n
Q)
N
C)
H
I
c
w
Q
° -Er
CC)
Adm
w   .
(no)   se
m
U
11-
on
\
I
m
I
1:-
en
\
l
m
w
o-
m
ul
or
m
I
II'
on
\
l
m
§
I
I
CD
J.
'J
w
Q
KJ
w
U'
an
\
I
co
-_Li
0'
§
I
I
c
E
.Q-
3
m
G
E
o
s..
é
E
E
'q
.g
ea
H
3
ac
.L
.is
": 1:
up
H
.J
*
.§
u
8
u. _L
E
*u
q
as
H
.J
ii
M
*z
§
I
2°
IE
-SJ _I
or!!
ac
A.
Y
3
2
'q
E"
cu
G
,g
13
g
$5
é"
_r
-9.7 _'I'
.g
$1
5
mm
L
q
so.
L
Q
.Q
in
*is
1
g
L
*J
é
E
I   an
.1
o
E
4-1
s:
.E
n
u
>
._L
.s
E
of
m
_|
55
`2
§
H'
.g
1'
-E
-I
5
I
t   2
g.
in
Jaqwnu   urmso
.'
H   N   in
'¢
in   Q   r-   00   Cr
Q
H
H
'H
N
H
I
. E
g
:E
3
.
.8
H
D
I
I
Z
cs
ii
2
d
é
3
3
6
I
1
e
E
E'
m
z
n
m
9.-
m
5
3°
3
2
s
-3
1-*
'5
E
G
£3
is
m
o
F5
'G
:
'o
:
8
.3
5
0)
'D
m
.2
U
2
E
o.
E
an
r-:
an
en
an
in
'E
in
3,
(0-
CL 6
z
of:
E
\.
O
u.
2
E
E
E
3
E
§
g
E
E
g
2
_g
§
3
U
6
.E
:
3
g
"6
s
g
s
2
4-»
Q
'E
-H
an
.c
6
'a
5
as
un
N
.:
D.
do
an
|-
.:
*II
no
E
g
i
2
3
£0
1-
.|
*
o
N
1
|-
.2
W
4-1
:
un
as
n:
-H
3
|-
*
o
.2
:
'u
G)
.:
u
m
3
in
|-
Tb'
1-
l.l.
o
'ii
:
D
u.l
I
n
E
|-
o
u.
u
':
v
:
as
U
U
in
Q
so
z
I.LI
(J
§
s
2
I
E
E
§
2
g
g
3
g
E
E
E
E
E
g
.of
Guidance note 3: Inspection   a.   Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
127

GENERIC SCHEDULE OF TEST RESULTS
NOTES
The following notes relate   to   the column number in the form (Form 3).
I
4
5
6
7
B
g
10
II
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
24
Circuit number, for three-phase installations it is preferred   to   use the designation
Li, L2, LE. For example, for the
5th
circuit, the designation would be 5Li, 5L2
and   sL3.
2   Circuit description   -   can be brief (such as fluorescent lighting).
3   BS (EN), enter the Standard of manufacturer of the circuit protective device
(such as (BS EN) 60898)
Type   - where relevant for circuit-breakers   enter   the characteristic   type   (e.g. C).
Rating   -   enter the protective device's   current   rating.
Breaking   capacity   -   enter   the   protective   device's   breaking   capacity,   often
'printed' on circuit-breakers (e.g. 6000).
RCD   IAn rating in mA -   30   mA for additional   protection.
Maximum permitted loop impedance for the circuit protective device from Table
41 of BS 7671.
Reference Method   - enter the cable's installed reference method, by using
Table 4A2 of BS 7671
Conductor details   -   enter live conductor csa in mm2.
Conductor details   -   enter circuit protective conductor csa in m m .
Ring line-line open resistance continuity in ohms, see   2.6.6.
Ring neutral-neutral open resistance continuity in ohms, see 2.6.6.
Ring cpc-cpc open resistance continuity in ohms, see 2.6.6.
Ring (Ri + RQ) -   enter   the value recorded whilst carrying   out   Step   3   of the ring
continuity test, see 2.6.6. Note that where meaningless results are recorded,
due   to   parallel   return   paths, and it has been established and the inspector has
verified continuity, a value is   not   necessary in this cell, and the cell may be
ticked.
Continuity R2   add the value   of   the   cpc continuity   reading. If   using Test
method   2, the   'wandering lead' method, then   enter   the maximum value of
the   various   readings   that   were   measured   on   the   circuit.   Note   that   where
meaningless results are recorded, due   to   parallel   return   paths and it has been
established and the inspector has verified continuity, a value is   not   necessary in
this cell, and the cell may be ticked.
Insulation resistance test voltage usually   $00   v   unless circuit may be damaged.
Insulation resistance, L-L   -   enter the minimum value recorded during testing the
circuit for each of the various configurations, see 2.6.7.
Insulation resistance, L-E   -   enter the minimum value recorded during testing the
circuit for each of the various configurations, see 2.6.7.
Polarity - tick this cell when the polarity for the circuit has been confirmed, see
2.6.13. A cross,   'x',   may be used   to   indicate incorrect polarity only where the
form accompanies an EICR.
ZS - enter the circuit earth fault loop impedance by whatever method you have
selected   to   determine it by, see   2.6.16.
22,   23   Enter the results from the tests carried   out   on any RCDs fitted   to   the
circuit, 2.6.19.
Confirm AFDD test button test, where AFDD's have   test   buttons.
25   Remarks   - this cell is provided   to note   anything relevant   to   the circuit and
testing, see the completed examples of Form 3.
128
Guidance Note   3:   Inspection & Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
IQ;

.   .   .   .   . .   .   . . .   . .   . . .   .   .   . . .   . . .   .   . . . .   . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . . . . .   . . .   .   .   . .   .   . .   . .   .   .   . .   . .   . . . .   . .   . . . .   . . .   . .   .   . . .   .   . .   .   . . .   .   .   . . .   . .   . .   .   . .   . . .   .   . . .   .   .   . . .   .
....... ...........   .   ..   .   ...................... ..   . ..........   .   .... .   .................................. .   ......   .   ....   . ........................   .   ....   .   ........
PART 2* Presence and adequacy of installation earthing and bonding arrangements (Regulation   132.16)
9/1-r
1.2
Q l   r   . .
3.
Other.   . Structural steel efea8   de.
1. System earthing arrangement:   TN-S   TN-C-S
2.   Earth fault loop impedance   at   distribution board (Zeb) supplying the final circuit .
Presence of adequate main protective conductors:
Earthing conductor   is(
Main protective bonding cenductor(s) to: Water
-   8WSPN
.   .   .   .   I   I   .   .   I   I   I   . .   . .   . .   .   .   .   I   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   I
5
q   v   1   |
6
A
PART 3: Circuit details
DB   Reference No.:   1
Circuit   No,:
Circuit overcument protective device:
Conductor sizes:
Circuit description:
BSIEN)
Live   _
- -   . .   -   4   4   ¢   ¢   -   »   n
DB   Location and type:   Top   of   stairs.
Lighting..to   upstairs
.6100<§z
Type.   B
1.5   mm'   GPC-   1.o
1
»
Rating
mm
.
..   n o .   l . l   a   . a s *   a   *   .   .   *   l   n o _   A   4   ¢   -   h   e   -
.   .   |   .   .
(where lielewiant and pmcticabie)
n   or
e----Q-.1.~
n   nm   N/A   Q   wGl¢p¢   N/A   o
. t2¥?.9.. mn   Live-Earth   .   +.2,'?'if   mc:
O 1   1 w   Z:
*
- -   .   |   q
*
§
PART 4: Test results for the circuit aliened or extended
Protective   conductor continuity:
R+
RE .   H
Continuity of ring   final   circuit oonduchors:   UL
Insulation   resistance:   Lhre - Live
Polarity   sati5f3c."lo4'y:   Maximum measured earth   fault bop impedance:
RCD   operation: Rated residual operating   current   (IM)   .
30
mA
Disconnection time at   28
Satisfactory test   button operation
PART 5: Declaration
a
I certify   that the work covered by   this oertifcate   does not   impair   the safety   of the existing installation and   the   work   has
been   designed, constructed.   inspected and   test-ed   in   accordance   with BS   7671:201B   (IET   Wring Regulations)
amended   to   ..2,¢218..   (data) and that to   the   best of my knowledge and belief,   at   the time of   my inspection,
complied   with   BS 76?1   except   as detailed in   Part 1 above.
I
. .   Q   .
Name:
For and on behalf of:
Address:
6
GEOFF THOMPSON
T8zG   Efectricai
25   Whiteleaf   Close
Newton
EA4 SXX
*
1°
|-
U   r   l   .   P I   o   r
1°
q
1   1   t r l i r l l   r   l   r   r u r   l r   r w   w   i   u   l   i   1   1
1
1   .   r   . o r   I   .   .   .   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1
Signature Co Thompson
Position Proprietor
Date   27   J*»'1lH..201-8
MINOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION WORKS CERTIFICATE   Form   4   No.
(REQUIREMENTS   FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS   I   BS 7671   [IET   WIRING   REGULATIONS])
To bi   used only for minor electrical work which does not include   the   provision of a new circuit
1,234
;
PART 1:
*
2. Installation locaticmnMddress
Descrlptlon of the mlnof works
1. Details of the Client   Mr   81:   MYI$   B{ogg$   Date   n'inor   world   completed 27   Jung 2018
41   Larkspur   Drive, Newton, NT1   YES
3.   Description   of   the   minor   works   2.   new..Iightl'rx.g.p¢Jints to. aH?iae/.lzedrrnzrn   25   of a=lweNa'n@
4. Details of departures. if any. from BS 7671:201B for the circuit altered or extended (Regulation 1203. 133.1.3   and   133.5):
Where applicable. a suitable risk   aeeeeement{s}   must be attached to the Certificate
Neon. .e!¢sztrf¢f¢s.e¢.pi?!?es:s   .t§mxin=e.==.f.   £-'iwkr"*¢"~1t   of.ante:-ltferx   .¢.e<t-.Qs*.t..fs<.€~'==.   :=£m§'r   Risk   assessment   attached
cracked.   Customer advised   to   pp
5. Comments on (including any detects observed in) the existing installation (Regulation 644.1 .2):
contact   suppler
Nor-.e
..   . l t ' l » . . l . 1 ° I - l . . 1 - r 1   P   Y   l   °   *   *   *   l   l   °   *   "   .   1   l   *   *   l   I   1   1   1   -   Y   I   1   1   I   P   f   f   l   1   P   1   .   l   1   1   -   1   .   Y   l   1   '   F   l   l   .   °   '   *   °   l   *   °
Guidance note 3: Inspection   a.   Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
EI
129

MINOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION WORKS CERTIFICATE
notes for the person producing the certificate
Scope
The Minor Electrical Installation Works Certificate is intended   to   be used for alterations
or additions   to   an installation that do   not   extend   to   the provision of a new circuit.
Examples include the addition of socket-outlets or lighting   points   to   an existing circuit, the
relocation of a light switch   etc.   This Certificate may also be used for the replacement of
equipment such as accessories or luminaires, but   not   for the replacement of distribution
boards, consumer units or similar items. Appropriate inspection and testing, however,
should always be carried   *   irrespective of the   extent   of the work undertaken. (   J l I
Part   I   Description of minor   works
1,2,3   The minor works   must   .
"a L8   C
al
|   8
r \ *   dl
1
N.
l`v
J
4
5
described that the work that is the subject of
the certification can be re
f
identified.
See Regulations 120.3 are   53.5. No departures are   to   be expected except
in the   most   unusual circumstances. See also Regulation 644.1.
Note any defects observed in the existing installation that are not related to
the work being carried out.
€XiStIH
a
'QXEIIW 316
Under the 'Comments on   g installation
r
heading, only deficiencies that do
not impair the safety of any   Iteration or addition covered by the certificate may
be referred   to.   An   |   is existing main bonding conductors identified by the
colour green only (rather than green-and-yellow) or which have a cross-sectional area
less than that requir   y Chapter   54   but nevertheless considered adequate by the
designer of the alter   i   or addition.
ad b
MMf
Any deficiency liable   to   impair the safety of the alteration or addition must be corrected
before the alteration or addition is carried   out.   See Regulation 132.16.   lt   would be
unacceptable simply   to   refer   to   the deficiency on the certificate.
Part   2   Installation earthing and bonding - existing installation
The existing earthing and bonding   must   be inspected and tested   to   confirm that it is
adequate for the new works.   Any   extension   to   earthing and bonding must be installed
for the works if required.
Part   3   Circuit details
Generally for domestic installations this be simple. Record details of the circuit protective
device and circuit conductors. COMPLETE THE CIRCUIT CHART DETAILS ON THE DB
OR CONSUMER UNIT.
Part   4   Essential tests
ting The relevant provisions of Part   6   'Inspection and tes   ' of BS 7671   must   be applied
in full   to   all minor works. For example, where a socket-outlet is added   to   an existing
circuit it is necessary   to:
ca)
establish   that the   earthing   contact   of   the   socket-outlet   is   connected   to   a
suitable means of earthing via the main earthing terminal
130
Guidance   note   3: Inspection   s.   Testing
®   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

(b)
(0)
(al)
to)
measure the insulation resistance of the circuit that has been added to, and
establish that it complies with Table 64 of BS 7671
measure   the   earth   fault   loop   impedance   to   establish   that   the   maximum
permitted disconnection time is   not   exceeded
check that the polarity of the socket-outlet is   correct
(if the work is protected by an RCD) verify the effectiveness of the RCD.
part   5 Declaration
When filling   out   and signing a form on behalf of a company or other business entity,
individuals   must   state   for whom they are acting.
GUIDANCE FOR RECIPIENTS (to be appended to the Certificate)
This Certificate has been issued   to   confirm that the electrical installation work   to   which
it relates has been designed, constructed, inspected and tested in accordance with
British Standard 7671   (IET Wiring Regulations).
You should have received an 'original' Certificate and the contractor should have
retained a duplicate. If you were the person ordering the work, but   not   the owner
of the installation, you should pass this Certificate, or a copy of it,   to   the owner.   A
separate   Certificate should have been received for each existing circuit on which minor
works have been carried out. This Certificate is   not   appropriate if you requested the
contractor   to   undertake more extensive installation work, for which you should have
received an Electrical Installation Certificate.
The Certificate should be retained in a safe place and be shown   to   any person
inspecting or undertaking further work on the electrical installation in the future. If you
later vacate the   property,   this Certificate will demonstrate   to   the new owner that the
minor electrical installation work carried out complied with the requirements of British
Standard 76Yl   at   the time the Certificate was issued.
131
'Cl
Guidance note 3: Inspection 8= Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology

SECTION
° .*~m
..   .   ..   I
I   u   p   I   I   I   I   A
N#
.   ,
A
1   . .   I   I   ... .EA11...Z.ZZ Postcode:
A. DETAILS OF THE PERSON ORDERING THE REPORT
.M   Parker
._The   Beeches
.QUAINTLIEE
SECTION B. REASON FOR PRODUCIHG THIS REPORT   V   I   ' I V   v l ~   I * - Y - 1 1   v   r   v   v   -   Q   q   -   1   '   I   u   - w e   I   I   !   l   g   -   l v -   I   P   I   - q   1   1   : V u   Y   I   '   1   ' l U * 1 l   I   - , , . - Client reported flickering   lights
I
. ' |   'I'   l-   1   l umr.41ichin   n and   test   was carried   out Date{s)
1
(date)
A   > -
.   I   N a n .
SECTION   c.   DETAILS OF THE INSTALLATION WHICH IS THE SUBJECT OF THIS REPORT
Oscupier   Asabnve
Address   ..As.Abave
EA11   buzz
. Postcode:
I   l   l   l l . l   l . l   l . l   n n n a l s a s   A n n a
I   I   ..
am
4
l   a   b   '   b   i   »   i n
.years
iN
.
|   |»
as
Desaiptinn   e   ises
Domestic   Commercial   Industrial   Other   (include   brief   desr.:ripdon}
Estimated   age if wiring system
'I
years
Evidence of addttonsfatlerations   Yes   No   Not apparent   if yes, estimate age
Installation records available? (Regulation 651.1)   Yes   No   Date of last ins
I   I   .   I I   I .   I   l   l   A   a   l   l   L
I I .   l   l   l   l   .   l   .   l r
v   v   v   |
4 1 1 1   .   I   I   I   . I I   a n   L a   L l l l l l h   I l l   . I   I I   L a n   .   |   .   . I I   l   l   l   l   . 4   s .   l   .   l   .   l   .   .   l   l   l   I   I l l . .   . I   l   l l . l l l L . .   a I L A s . a » . a L A l n 4   .   .   l   l   l   .   l   l   l   .   l   l   .   .   l   .   l   .   l   .   l   l   l   .   l   .   l   . . l . . . l   . I
l   .   l   .   .   l   .   l   .   .   l   I   1 . . 1 . 1 . . . . . 1   I   .   .   l   .   .   l   .   I t   l . l . l l   .   l   .   l   r   .   l   l   l   .   l   l   .   l   l   .   .   l   .   .   l   l   l   l   .   l   l   l   l   .   l   l   .   .   l   .   l   l   l   l   l   l   I   l   l   l   l   l   l   I   .   l   l   l   l   l   l   l   .   l   l   l   l   .   .   l   l   l   l   l   .   .   l   .   ...
v
1   r .   1 1   r   I   I   .   .   .   |   r   .   .   |   r   1   I   I   . .
SECTION D. EXTENT AND UIIITATIONS OF INSPECTION AND TESTING
Extent d the eieclrical ipstdlatbn ooyelfd by this report
Vqgsual mspectaon.   orig   o   suppliers   to
Ami,   may.   p..rQ£e£§!'x§ ,.a»d supp   lementn   re   bonding conductors   and
Agreed   Ilmltabons induding the reasons (see Regul8tlorl   6632)
rwuraal   equapment, inspection and   test   of   consumer
Finaf   circuits.
Na disturbance of bullairng   fabnaf,
.   .   .   .   l   .   l   I   . Nana ...)
Agreed with:   Clrlent..
Operational limitatknns including the reasons (see page no..
in roof spaces, and generally wilihin the fabric of the bu   long or
An i
| m*if J   L   s   ,
It should be muted that cables concealed within trunking and conduits,
made within an accessible
The inspection and tasting detailed in this   rt   and aooompanyirg sdiedules have been married   out   in aoeordanoe with BS 7671: 2018 (IET
Wiring Regulations) as amended to
under doors,   i
r
underground have   not   Mm inspected unless speciicalry agreed between the client and inspector prior   lo   We inspeclim.   nspeciion should be
'face   ha   .
'*
t"i'1er   electrical   e   prent.
.   1
IT
.
n   (   i   n   to   .   ,edrical   safety)
l w v v i v n   v   i
*.   1   1   1   1
»
r   I
u   w t   r   v-1   I   -   u   r   r
-~
» ~   v   . v -   n u   - o r   u   a s   v -   - o r   r -   l r -   ¢ 1 1 1 1   g y p   r   1 1 1 1   i n   * i t   i I 1   P   I l w r r   v   l   '   l   e v r   s o   1 r   11-   I r   1   l   a s   i   r   :   v - 1 1 r   v   v   -   1 ".11-1
r¢f1~'t¢m¢»t§..Qf..B.$.z6-f.-3s?O..
as I°r\5erLe.rafl5   condition,
were
.-
The
Fiona the
has   giver-.   rise
|   i n -
gone(
m$f:a"ed   In   2062.
"e1aot1*fa:"shor:k;- Y
I I | I 'An unsalisfad
SECTION   E SUlil IllARY   OF   THE CONDITION   OF   THE INSTALLATIONTHS instantiation   was constructed   When the
General condition of the   on
•   1
were l."'-.H@§'§§.-..... ..
l°n$tal!ot:'on   does   n   up!   u   '35   7671:2018,   but   apart
connecflon   ii rrongement   oI;adéfi%l'onaY Trgkffng p u f f s which   TNS   to
aeswmemsseaf   of   s°ssssfs}fs!a§..€£u£Q"s"**'
u~lsAnsFAcToRy'   {Doled as appl10priate}
assessment   indicates that dan
.
rous   (code   C1} and/or   entialhl dangerous (code CQ) conditions have been idamtifed.
SECTION F. REcolauEI~nATloHs
Where the overall   assessment   of the suitabiily of   the   installation for continued use above   is   stated as UHSATISFACTORY, I free recommend that
any   observations   classified as   Danger present (code   C1} or   'Potentially dangerous (code C2} are acted   upon as a   matter   d urgency-
Investigation without delay is recommatded for obsenfalions idenlitied as   Further investigation   required'   (code   Fl).
Observations classified as   'improvement   recommendbd'{oode C3) should be give due consideration.
I
l   u :
L
'-   a   .   I   I So   mm to   the necessary remedial action being   tdten, Use   recommend that the installation is further ins   ed and tested by J.Hf,t4.   (date
`
I
sermon   G. DECI.ARllkTlOH
|!\*.   bang the person(s] responsible for the inspldon and Nesting of Me electrical installation (as indicated by myfour signatures
below), pertlculars of which are described above, having exercised reasonable skill and care when carrying   out   the inspection and
testing, hereby declare that the information in this report, Inchtdng the observations and the attached schedules, provides an   accurate
assessment of the condition of the olodrical installation tall   Into   account   the stated   extent   and limitations in section D of this report.
1   1   l   |   r   1   l   1   I   .   l   r   .   |-   1   l   v   I   1   l   l   1   ..   l   .   v   .   .   l   .   1
1   -   .   -   -   -   -   1   .   »   . - -   - .   »   -   1   n -   -   |   -   1   U   r   -   u   r   1   -   1
n   ¢   ~ -   ¢   -   l   T b   ,   u   u   -   -   I   l   u   i l   u l   h
- a l l   I   I   . 4   .   I   t   I   4   A   .   . .   I   ....   I I   I   A   l   l   I   I   A   . I   I   I
THQ.M.F?.§QN.
`gnature   0M;S0W
.
. ectrrcal
Prqfrlgtqy
25   WN eleasf   CIQQQ   NEWTOWN
.EA4..5XX..
Inspected and tested b   :
Name {Capitals)   (,s;.d.E
Sl   G   Tia
Forlorn behalfd   T   and   C   f
Position
Address
Date   17   .7J.Ml,§j.r.2,Q18 Postcode:
1 . 1 . . 1 . . 1 . 1 1 . 1 . .
1 1 .   1   r   1   r I 1 r 1   l   1   r   1   1   1   1   .   1   1   1   r .   C   u   r   l   r . l   I   r . 1   . 1 . Signature
- - .   1   - --   .   » . --   - .   -   1   - -   1   p   1 -   |   -
-   I -   l   u   4   -   -   I 4 1   I   - i   u p   I   t   4   4   i   s - 4
F
Tag,
Thomson
.
T
*C
lectrrcal
Prqrrwtgt
I   I I   I I   I I I l l   I   I   l   l   I   .   I   I   I I   I   a   I I   l   l   . L   l   I   I   l   l   .   I
.
I   I l l
Report authorized for issue
Name lcaparals)
Forfon  behalf of and
Position
Address   2.   We   efeasf   Close,   NEWTOWN
Nara 1.7.=Jr4   by   -24918   Postcode.   .EA£~...5'):(2(..
1 <   4   I   I
I I l .
sEcTlor4   H. SCHEDULE(S)
1   sch»edule[s) of inspection and   . _   ...schedule(s] of test results are attached.
The   attadted sd1edule{s} are   rt   of this document and   this re   rt   is   did   only   when   they   are attached   to   it.
ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION CONDITION REPORT Fund 5   No, 1235
m
pagel   d'.5
132
Guidance   note   3: Inspection & Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

SECTION I. SUPPLY CHARACTERlSTlCS AND EARTHIHG ARRANGEMENTS
Eaurthing
arrangements
Number and Type of Live
1
Conductors
Nature of Supply Pasameters   Supply Protective Device
of
TN-C
TN-S
TN-C-S
TT
IT
E(
Ac   E
1-phase, 2-wire
2   phase, 3-wire
3 phase, 3-wire
3   phase, 4-wire
DC
2-wire
3-wire
Other
1'
.   .   |   r   t   r   1   v   1   1 1 1
.   ,   q   1   .   1   -   .   .   -
t1|orninaIv\;1|tage.U!Un"'   250   V
Nominal frequency, ffu   so   Hz
Prnspedive   fault   warren, l¢¢t2!   ..GhB...   pA
Extremal loop impedance, Ze*'3l ...0-2.9.   n
(Note: rVbwwvW
r2Jbv@~41w>rvfbw~vHs=1nvmvw¢l
wow
We
-   I »   .
- v
p -   -   1   ,
-   I I h -
1561
i y p e u
.LIQ Rated current
I
I   l   EI Confirmation of supply   a
Other eouroes of supply (as detailed on attached schedule)
SECTION J. PARUCULARS OF INSTALLATION REFERRED TO   IN   THE REPORT
Means   of   Earthing
Dish1'butor's facility
Installation earth
decntvude
Details of Installation Earth Electrode   (where applicable)
I l l   a   n   L   i   l
Type
Localion
Resistance to Earth   Cl
N / A
_.N/A
N/A.   ..
Main Protective Conductors
Earlhin-g conductor   16   mm I   I
CS-8 -   ...   ¢   »   .   ~-   ~   ¢ I   - O   or Material   n Connec:tioru I continuity verified
l   ..   .
Main protective bonding   oundur;tors
(to   extraneous-c:onductive-   s)
10   -.mm Material   Copper   c:e.a   re C*r'*~*r"c»n   I   oonthuity   v¢**'i*-H
n :
'1'
LJ To   water   installation pi   S   1 .   | ; s   £1 To gas installation pi   To   oil inslallatbn pi   S   \ _   .mu r&l$tBBI T
To lightning protection   specify To   other
Main Switch I Switch-Fuss! Ckcult-Breaker! RCD
.r
.U
Locmiun
4   4 1 4
-   5   o n e   -   »   a A » 4 l   n - 4
I   I   . I   r   .
www
Noof   es
&Y`7r.StQlI"$.,
..c,upbo¢:1,rd
@0947-3
2
» -   |   I
Current rating   .JLQCP A
Fuse   I   device rating or setting   N/A   A
Voltage rating   230   v
If RCD main switch
I I   .   5   1   .   - i n
AH)
.mA
.ms
. - .ms
i i   . r   . 1 1 - 1   l r
,.
_
-   -   I
N/A
N/A
N/A
Rated reslduaI operating   current   (I
Rated   IsTle   delay
measured operating time
'
(see below):
SECTION K. OBSERVATIONS
Referring   to the atladled   schedules of inspection and test results, and subject to the limitations speared   at   the Enenf and limitations d inspediori
and testing   section
No remedial action is required   The following observations are made
OBSERVATION(S)
Ilnzbda schaduh   ndlnnu,   a apprundlbs   CLASSIFICATION
CODE
1.DnmageJ:o..1l§lnt£ng.c1}'rc:u.it.at.junc.tian..box..Arcing.ana[..hurnt..iln.sulatl'an..zvident,
I   |   .   I   I   L   I   I 2..J..onsa..canrue¢:.tian..as..af2o.~.<a,.c.au.srng   um:elc'ahf¢..e.¢:1rth:ng.n£.c.nrrmit.ana[..rlIsk of fire.
3..Na..adalit:bnaI.pmtectr'an..bg.RCD..fa:.Iaw..vuItaga.r:ircu&s..I'n.bathronnn....
4=.Nn..enrthzd,..me.chnnfcaf..nlr..addition.p.lrntectl°ar.L.bg.RCD..1'ur..::ab1e$.¢:anaeafzd..
.,m..waHs,...
NQTE...FauIty..saction..of.Iigl:\ting.1:::r:c1.u't..discax\nzcted..wfth.client?s..ap$ra.val..
*   *
*
* *
*
*
.C2...
Cl..
.CO...
*
*
CO...
*
6
One of the following codes. as appropriate, has been allocated to each   pf   the observations made   above   to indicate to the pens   onrsl responsible for
the installation the degree of urger   for remedial action .
l " C1   - Dan.   rpresent. Risk of iniurf. Immediate remedial action required
C2   -   Potentially dangerous   -   urgent remedial action required
C3   -   Improvement recommended
FI   Further investigation required without delay
Page 2   of
133
@
Guidance Note 3: Inspection & Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
.5..

OUTCOMES
Acoeptaafsis
oondininn
J
Unacceptable
condition
mama
C1   NCI
lmpvwamenf
recommended
State
C3
Further
.invesdgarim
FI   No verified   NN   Umitation   un   No! applicable   NIA
Nan
H0
DESCRIPTION
OUTCOHE
(Use   codes above. Provide addwuna!
cnummenr   wihefe   approprrhta.
C1 C2 C3ar\dF!mdedifans!obereonirded
in Secnbn   K of the Covadxlinn   Report)
1.0   - I DlSTRIBUTOR'S   r   SUPPLY   INTAKE EClUIPlllENT visual Ins   colon on
1.1   Service cable   N/
A
1.2   Servkze head
I
1.3   Earthing anangenenl   v
1.4   M   +5   our tails
15
1.5,
Mn   ii   ring   '8'C1JiDM6UI
'~.llij   Br   (where present)   N / A
2.0   PRESENCE UF   ADEQUATE   ARRANGEMENTS FUR OVTHER SOURCES SUCH AS
IICROGENERATORS (551.6' 551 ~7)
N / A
3.0   EARTHIHG f BOHDIHG ARRANGEMENTS (411.3; chap 54)
8 1   Pnesenoe   and   condition of dislribulaur's earthing arrangement (542.121, 542.1 .2.2}
8,
')
4.   Presence and condition of earth dedrode oannedrinn   where applicable   (542.1.2.3}
J
N
.'l   3
3 4
-|'.
-
.
on   or   eahinglhonding Iabds   an   dl   appreciate   ncauuns   (514.13.11
.co   inmation ofearlling conductor size (542.3, 5411.1l   v
35
n
H   c8sibiily 8°d Gondition of °@'01hQ oondudor at MET   ($43.32)
3 5   1)
-
(544- 5 2 5 vm0' mud fig
_
b0"-'i
h
ofmain
fn1»°*'°"
Con
1
3   Condition and accessibility OI   main   pruaaaiva bumhg   ggndugbf   connsWnns (543.3.2, 54-4.1.2}
3 3   Acoessibiily md condition of other protective   bonding   onnneciions {54~3.1 )
*g
CONSUMER UNlT{S) I DISTRIBUTION BOARD(S}
4.1   Fe:-~. nd-n   sibiily to   cnnsurnef   unitfdistribulinn   board   (132.12;   5131) racy of woridng spacela
4.2   Securtycrffirjng (13411)
4.3   Condlim   dendosure(s) in   Marms   of   IP   am   e'h(4162}
4,4   :   I   I Condliun   ofendoa1re(s}   in   rems d   fre   `   et:   (421 ,1.201,   5265)
4.5   Endnsure run   damageddekariorated so   as to impai' safety {651.2}
4.6   Praaenosdrnah   Ihksd svm'ch (as required by462.1.201)
4.7   Opevainn cifmain switch lfumunnal   .:he¢kl (643.10)
4.8   Manual   operation of drmlt-breakers   and   RCDS   In   prove   dhoonneclion l6-43.10)
4.9   Connect identihzatinn   of circuit details and   protective devices £514.8.1 514.9.1)
4.10   Praccnce   nfncc   sbc-mcnlhry test notice   al   or near consumer unit!distn'buhcr\ board (514.12.2)
4.11
-   |   |   4
I Present of non-Mnckard   (mixed) Wie cdou   Sami   rmutice   a   or rear mnsuna   urll¢Hlsh1bulun   hoard (51-L14
4.12   Prmenoe of altafrmiive   sqnply walling rnlioe at or near oursurrrar mitMisributiun   board   (51-4.15)   N   A
4.13   Presence of ache:   required   labeling   (please   specify)   (season   5143   N / A
4.14   Cempalibiity of pmmeciive devices, bases and other components; canned type and ruling (Ne gage,   off
unacceptable   1l'iBflll'i8l mage. arcing or oveffleadilg)1411.3.2. 411 .4;   411.5. 411.61 Sections 432.   433)
J
4.15   Single-pole switching or proiedivedewices in line cnnnducinrsonly {132.14.1;   530.3.3)
4.16   Pmlnediun   against   madtanical damage   whale cables   enter   cnnsunar utivdismnuuun   board {132.14.1'   52z.a.1,
522.8.5; 5228.11}
J
4.17   l .   :-m   I   kg.   |   -
Prueecu-an   are   iceiiiecis   where cables enter consumer unrUdetinulien   boerdlendeeures (52151
-In .   9-,
1   '~?f"'U-(5)   Pl0'i=IHd   hr fade pfuwwun   - indudas   men   (411.4.9,   411.52; 5312)   N / A
44
4   J
"'l.   . 1   -   includes RCBOS   (411 .3.3.   415.1) (s   waded fur auanmn8l   pmtadon   5
, m   indication that SPIJ   is flllt':Iil:lnal (651.4}   N / A
4.21
-
4.2
.   'Imation   1hot   ALL conductor connections,   including connections to   busbcrs,   are moody located   in
.-'
v
rdsand aetightand sccuIe(526.1)
\/
lkja ,   pa anangarnanm   where a   generating   see   opemles   as a alm'l1:had   dtemalhe   n the puNk   amply   (551.B)   N A
4,25 I I   I-I whefea -.
_ I
-
..
lilueqnnte
arla
'
fig   Sal upavaies   in   peldle4   van   the   public   supply   (551J)   N / A
Form   6 No.   . _
1`v'u/e;   Tfzia   form L: suifublejor   many Types ofsmalfer installation,   not   emlzzsively domestic.
CONDITION REPORT INSPECTION SCHEDULE FOR
DOMESTIC AND SIMILAR PREMISES WITH   upTo   100 ASUPPLY
12z»5/6
I
Page   15   of.5.
134
Guidance note 3: Inspection & Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

ourcoues
Accnepfabls
..   ./
Unaacaptabuls
condition
Side
C1 orCa
Inlpnwamelrl
reccwnmended
so
CO
Fuffher
. 1   1 In anion
FI   NO! verified   HN   un   no.:   applic   a\bI6   WA
nEII
IID
DESCRPTDH
ourcoln
rmaummnwamwanmm
unmmini   ldlifilppmuprialu.
Cf. CO.   Ca   u»dnmdadiaammuw»~uu»uad
msenunnxdmecafumumnepnnl
5.0   FINAL CIRCUITS
`   1.   wicalion of oonducdnors {514811 5.1
\
*L 5.2   s   cuneciy suppurlad lhrougbout their run [521.10.202. 522.5)
58   <iumafi@ulatmnufhepafrsl41s.1l
Cl,
Hut   .-sl1ea'II1ed   cab's   pmutadsd   by   enduslm8   in ounddt, duding   U   ll'unkin,,   1521.12+.'l 5.4
v
l   To include the   iMegrilyuf conduit   and Inmking systems {maldlic and plastic)
5.5   Adequacy of cables br 4:1.lTBM-carryirrg   capacity with   leg   id fur the type and rialle of   installation (Sacion 523)
5.6   Cnorcinaliun   behneen   conductors   and overload pmtsdiva   devices (4331,   533.2.1)
5.7   Adaqmcy of pronadiva dsWms: type and rated   cumanl   fur fault prnlectiun (411.3)
50   Presence   and adequacy ofuiulil   protective   onnduders   {43.1, Seciiun 5431
5.g   Wining   syalnam(s]   appropriate Fur the type and na1JJra of the ilalalalion aid andamal inliuanoaa (Section 522)
5.10   Concealed Gabbi insladled   an   prascriaed runes [sea Seciun D. Evan:   and   imlitaiiorrs) {522.6202)
5.11   Cables conuaaled under   floors.   above ceiings or in wallsfpanitiuns, adaquaialy   prrabdsd against   damage (Asa
Ssciiull D.   Elder! and   Ernil'atiuns} (522.6.2*D4}   \/
5.12   Providuncif additional pl1JtBdionbyRCDnDt8J:~naBdhg30n'1A.
r
.   furl sndcal-outlewsofraling   2DAorlass,   unless m amaoaption is pufmllad (411.321)
.   re   apply to mozilla equipment mi esnnuedhg 32 A rating for   usage   cmdnnfs [411.33)
.   for mblaa   mrwaalad h walls at n dqith 01less   man 50   mm {522.6201; 522.s.zJ31
5
I   fur cables ouncealad it wals1'pul'titi0l1s containing metal   parts   regardless   of depth (522.6203]   I
.   Fed drnuim smdyhg   Imnhias wilhh domeaic: fhnussrmld) pnsrrisas (4113.4)
5.13   Prn»»mna1nr@nani»r¢~.,   saalng ananganarlsandpmladinnagainsllhemmalaflads (Sedan 527)
5-14   Band II :nbias sagragahadrsaparahd from Band   :mums   (528.1)
5.15   Cables segregladfsspamad   from cummanlcaliuns cabling {5282]
5.16   Cables   segnegaladfsspaalad   [nom   non-abcuical services (5283)
5-11   Tafniwalinn   of cables   at   endosules   - dedicate ancnsrllof sampling in Sedan   D aflhe lnpnn{sadon 528)
.   Comedians soundly madsatl molar no undue   slrah 1526.61
C1
.   No basic hsulaunn   d a mndumnr   may   onida   andosun   (526.B)
I'
.   Comsclinrrs of live ::=onduclnrs adequacy andnsad (5265)
r
.   Adequalaly camacmd at point of   entry   b   annbsum {grands,   bushes an.) [522.B.5   )
5.18   Gnndlion daonewalias irlducilg   sndoelt-outlets   swimuas mdpmbnnoas (661210)   1
.
5.19   PF'   :'*l.-'L   I   mies for enamel inl'luenclars (5122) snlrlnliycna
l
5.20   l'P&h'\C 'hurry   11)   equipment £1a:L12513.11 Adequacy of wnrldng spanafa
5.21   Shgla-pole sMllzhhg or   gerundive   dawns   it Ilna oonducinrs orly (132.141,   Sammy
6.0   LOCATlON{S} CONTAINING A BATH DR   snowsn
6.1   Addiund prolediun   mr   all bar vvllase   lLw   dmuiis by RCD D431   awneedhg   an   mA001.4113.3)
CO
6 2   Where used   as a   protective   measure requirements for SELV or PELV mel   (TCH   .414_4.5}
N / A
6.3   Shaver Eaudiels   Gvmdy with BS   EN   61558-2-5   formerly BS 3535 (701.5123-)
6,4   Presence efsul:q:»bmantary bonding   eendudnrs,   unless   mt   required   by BS 76712018 [701.415.2]'
6.5   Low vdlaga (eg- 230 vol socket-ouNals sled   at   hast 2.5 m from zuna   1 {701.512.EI)
6.6   Suilabiltyafecpipmanlfcrr axlsmd hNuennss for Inslalad lncalion in   lams   ofIp   rating (7015122)
5.7   Suilabilty   of amsssories and onntrolgaaetc. Br a parliaJlar   zone   (T01.512.3}
6.8   Suilabilty   afourrant-Ldrng equipment for pallmlarpositinn within   the location   [701.551
7.0   OTHER PART 7 SPECIAL IHS'rALI..N.TltJMS OR LOCATIONS
1.1
-;   I ;   r   I I   n
up   al   other   special   1nstallaibrus or Iocabnns present ii any.   (Rancid   separately   ha rasdts   of parlicutar
i   ctions   lad }
N / A
Form 6 No 12855°
f6
/
lnspggted by:
Name (Capitals)   Q.EQ.EE.I.!:!.Q.M.P5ON   Signature
Q._]]}.om.gjson__._..._._...   Date
8
Test results sdledules (Page 5 of 5   etc)   are also   to   be included with the EICR as   requested
Page   of
ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION CONDITION REPORT
NOTES FOR THE PERSON PRODUCING THE REPORT
1   This   Report should only be used for reporting on the condition of an existing
electrical installation and not for the installation of a consumer unit/distribution
board   distribution   board.   An   installation   which   was   designed   to   an   earlier
edition of the Regulations and which does   not   fully comply with the current
edition is   not   necessarily unsafe for continued use, or requires upgrading. Only
damage, deterioration, defects, danger   conditions and non-compliance with
the requirements of the Regulations,   h may give rise   to   danger, should be
recorded.
( J U S
whip
Guidance note 3: Inspection   a.   Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
135

2
3
4
5
6
7
8   (Cl) should be
ser
b?
9
10
II
12
The Report, normally comprising   at   least five pages, should include schedules
of both the inspection and the   test   results. Additional pages may be necessary
for other than a simple installation and for the "Guidance for recipients". The
number of each page should be indicated, together with the total number of
pages involved.
The reason for producing this Report, such as change of occupancy or landlord's
periodic maintenance, should be identified in Section B.
Those elements of the installation that are covered by the Report and those
that are not should be identified in Section D (Extent and limitations). These
aspects should have been agreed with the person ordering the   report   and
other interested parties before the inspection and testing commenced. Any
operational limitations, such as inability   to   gain access   to   parts of the installation
or an item of equipment, should also be recorded in Section o.
The maximum prospective value of fault   current   ( l f ) recorded should be the
greater of either the prospective value of short-circuit current or the prospective
value of earth fault   current.
Where an installation has an alternative source of supply a further schedule of
supply characteristics and earthing arrangements based upon Section I of this
Report should be provided.
A   summary   of   the condition   of   the   installation in   terms   of   safety   should
be clearly stated in Section E. Observations, if   arty,   should be categorised in
Section K using the coding co   to   C3 as appropriate. Any observation given
a code C1   or C2 classification should result in the overall condition of the
installation being reported as unsatisfactory.
Wherever practicable,   items classified as 'Danger present'
made safe on discovery.   Where this is   not   possible the owner or   U   should
given written notification as a matter of urgency.
Where an observation requires further investigation (Fl) because the inspection
has revealed an   apparent   deficiency which could   not,   owing   to   the   extent   or
limitations of the inspection, be fully identified and further investigation may
reveal a code Cl   or C2 item, this should be recorded within Section K, given
the code Fl and marked as unsatisfactory in Section E.
If the space available for observations in Section K is insufficient, additional
pages should be provided   as   necessary.
The   date   by   which   the   next   Electrical   Installation   Condition   Report   is
recommended should be given in Section E The interval between inspections
should take into   account   the   type   and usage of the installation and its overall
condition.
Any   deficiencies   with   intake   equipment   should be   reported   to   the person
ordering the work.
ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION CONDITION REPORT
GUIDANCE   FOR   RECIPIENTS   (to be appended to the Report)
This Report is an important and valuable document which should be retained
for future reference.
1
service
a
2
The purpose   of   this Condition   Report   is   to   confirm,   so   far   as   reasonably
practicable, whether or not the electrical installation is in a satisfactory condition
for continued   e (see Section E). The Report should identify any damage,
deterioration, defects   nd/or conditions which may give rise   to   danger (see
Section K).
The person ordering the Report should have received the "original" Report and
the inspector should have retained a duplicate.
136
Guidance note 3: Inspection   s.   Testing
o   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

3
4
be
-   1
- .
\   VI   otice   at   or near the device   stat   For
5
6
7   For items classified in Section
-`l
I   person
a   U1   1-5   ms classified in Section K
(
a
9
10
The "original" Report should be retained in a safe place and be made available
to   any person inspecting or undertaking work on the electrical installation in
the future. If the property is vacated, this Report will provide the new owner/
occupier with details of the condition of the electrical installation   at   the time the
Report was issued.
Where the installation incorporates a residual   current   device (RCD) there should
in   that it should be tested quarterly.
safety   reasons it is important that this instruction is followed.
Section   D   (Extent   and   Limitations)   should   identify   fully   the   extent   of   the
installation covered by this Report and any limitations on the inspection and
testing. The   inspector   should   have agreed   these   aspects   with   the   person
ordering   the   Report   and   with   other   interested   parties   (licensing   authority,
insurance company, mortgage provider and the like) before the inspection was
carried out.
Some   operational limitations such as inability   to   gain access   to   parts of the
installation or an item of equipment may have been encountered during the
inspection. The inspector should have noted these in Section   o.
K as Cl ("Danger present"), the safety   of those
using the installation is   at   risk,   and it is recommended that   led
or persons   competent   in electrical installation work undertakes the necessary
remedial work immediately.
as CO   "Potentially dangerous"),   the safety of
those   using the installation may be   at   risk   and it is recommended that
skilled person or persons competent in electrical installation work undertakes
the necessary remedial work as a   matter   of urgency.
Where it has been stated in Section K that an observation requires further
investigation (code Fl) the inspection has revealed an apparent deficiency which
may result in a code Cl   or C2, and could not, due   to   the   extent   or limitations
of the inspection, be fully identified. Such observations should be investigated
without delay. A further examination of the installation will be necessary,   to
determine the   nature   and extent of the   apparent   deficiency (see Section F).
For   safety   reasons,   the   electrical   installation   should   be   re-inspected   at
appropriate intervals by a skilled person or persons,   competent   in such work
The   recommended   date   by which the   next   inspection   is   due   is   stated   in
Section F of the Report under 'Recommendations' and on a label   at   or near   to
the consumer unit/distribution board.
CONDITION REPORT INSPECTION SCHEDULE
GUIDANCE FOR INSPECTORS
I
2
3
4
Section 1.0. Where inadequacies in the intake equipment are encountered the
inspector should advise the person ordering the work to inform the appropriate
authority.
Older installations designed prior   to   BS   76712008   may not have been provided
with RCDs for additional protection. The absence of such protection should as a
minimum be given a code cs classification (item 5.12).
The schedule is   not   exhaustive.
Numbers in brackets are Regulation references   to   specified requirements.
137
*Q
Guidance note 3: Inspection 8: Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology

138
Gudanne Note 3: Inspection   a   Testing
c The Institution d Engineering lid Tednology

A1   Tables
645.13
411.4.201
411.4.202
411.4.203
The tables in this appendix provide maximum permissible measured earth fault loop
impedances (ZS) for compliance with BS   7671,   which   must not   be exceeded when the
tests are carried   out   at   an ambient   temperature   of 10 °C. Table A6 provides correction
factors for other ambient   temperatures
Where the cables to be used are   to   Table   3,   4 or 5 of BS 6004, Table   3,   4 or 5 of
BS 7211, Table B.1 or B.2 of BS EN 50525-3-41 or are other thermoplastic: (PVC) or
thermosetting (low smoke halogen-free - LSHF) cables   to   these British Standards,
and the cable loading is such that the maximum operating   temperature   is 70 °C, then
Tables AI   to   AS give the maximum earth fault loop impedances for circuits with:
(a)
6 mm?
(b)
protective conductors of copper and having from   1   mm'   to   I   cross-
sectional area, and
an overcurrent protective device (i.e. a fuse)   to   BS 3036, BS 88-2 or BS 88-3.
For each type of fuse,   two   tables are given:
411.3.2.2   (a)
411.3.2.:s   (b)
where the circuit concerned is a   final circuit   not   exceeding   32   A and the
maximum disconnection time for compliance with Regulation 411.3.2.2 is   0.4   s
for TN   systems,   and
where the circuit concerned is a final circuit exceeding 32   A   or a distribution
circuit and the disconnection time for compliance with Regulation 411.3.2.3 is
5   s for TN   systems.
5431.3   In each table the earth fault loop impedances given correspond   to   the appropriate
disconnection time from a comparison of the time/current characteristics of the device
concerned and the adiabatic equation given in Regulation 54313.
The tabulated values apply only where the nominal voltage   to   Earth (Uo) is 230 V.
Table A4 gives the maximum measured Z5 for circuits protected by circuit-breakers to
BS 3871-1 and   BS   EN 60898, and RCBOS   tO   Bs   EN 61009.
Note: Tables 41.2 to 41.4
543.1
1
The impedances tabulated in this appendix are lower   than   those in Tables 41.2   to   41.4
of   BS   7671.   This is because the impedances in this appendix are measured values   at   an
assumed conductor   temperature   of   10   °c,   whilst those in BS   7671   are design figures   at
Guidance note 3: Inspection   a.   Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
139

v   Table Al
the line corrdudor maximrrn permitted operating   temperature   green in Table 52.1 of BS
7671 and the protective conductor assumed irrrrad   temperature   given in Tables 54.2   to
54.5   of BS   7671.   The correction factor (divisor) used   is   1.25. This corresponds   to   the
ine   conductor maximum operating   temperature   and protective conductor assumed
initial   temperature   both being   70   °C.   For   small   cross-sectional sea cables the
impedance may also be limited by the adiabatic equation of Regulation   54313.   A   value
of k of   IIS   from Table 54.3 of BS 7671   is   used. This is suitable for   pvc   insulated and
sheathed cables   to   Table   3,   4   or   5   of BS   6004   and for thermosetting (LSHF) insulated
aid sheathed cables   to   Table   3,   4   or 5 d BS   7211   Or   Table B.1 or B.2 of BS EN   50525-
5-41.   The k value is   based on both the thermoplastic (PVC) and thermosetting (LSHF)
cables operating   at   a maximum temperature of   70   °c.   The IET Commentary on tl'e 17th
Edition   d the IET Wiring Regulations provides a full   explanation.
Semi-endosed fuses. Maximum measured earth fault   loop   impedance (in ohms)
at   ambient temperature where the   overcurrent   protective device   is   a semi-
enclosed fuse   to   BS   3036
i)   0.4   second disconnection (final dltuits not exceeding   32   A in TN systems)
7.28   1.94   1.34
5 seconds.disconnection   Qinpl circuits   exceeding   32   A and distribution   cmguils in
Note   NP means that the combination of   the protective conductor
Permitted.
and   the fuse is Not
v   KAI Tab   BS   88-2   fuses- Maximum measured eardm   fault   bop impedance (in oh
ambient   llempefatune   where the   overcurrewt   ptonecnve device is a fuse
BB-2   Of   BS   88-6
ms)   dl
to   BS
(i)
0.4   second disconnection (final circuits   not   exceeding   32   A in TN systems)
26.5   12.5   6.2   3.7   1.9   1.3   L0   0.6
26.
265   125   61   1.0
L8
0.8
140
Gudanne Nome 3: Inspection a Testing
c The lnnslitulinnd Engineering led Tedunulogy
g   i   r   l
LO
r
22.5
on

("   5 seconds disconnection (final circuits exceeding 32 A and distribution circuits in
TN   systems)
II)
2.24   1.76   1.336   100   0.5   0.3   NP
Note:   NP   means that the combination of the protective conductor and the fuse is   Not
Permitted.
v   Table AS   BS 88-3 fuses. Maximum measured earth fault I   dance (in ohms)
at   ambient   temperature   where the   overcurrent   protective device is a fuse   to
BS 88-3
up   imp
(i)
0.4   second disconnection (final circuits   not   exceeding 32 A in TN systems)
7.94
7.94
1.84
1
1.84
1.54
.   t
1.0
.5
to 16   7.94   1.54
0.6
_
0.7
0.75
(ii)   5   seconds disconnection (final circuits exceeding 32 A and distribution circuits in
TN systems)
Note:   NP means that the combination of the protective conductor and the fuse is   Not
Permitted.
Guidance note 3: Inspection & Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
141

sTable   A4   Circuit-breakers. Maximum measured earth fault loop impedance (in ohms)
at   ambient   temperature   where the   overcurrent   device is a circuit-breaker   to
BS   3871   or BS EN   60898   or RCBO   to   B5 EN   61009
14.56   8.74   7.28   4.4   2.93   2.76   2.2   1.76   I .47   1.38   H   0.98   0.88   0   0.44
1
(M
0.4
5.82   3.5   2.33   2.15   1.17   0.78   0.55
3&C
11.65   7.0
5.82   3.49
1.75   1.4
1.10   87   0.7
1.1   0.87   0.7   0.35
0.54   0.44   0.38   0.35   0.28
I   1   l I   I
D 0.4 sec   1.46   0.87   0.55   0.44   0.35   0.28
Regulation 43-4.5.2 of BS 76712018 requires that the protective conductor csa meets
the requirements of BS EN   60898-   or BS EN 61009-1, or the minimum quoted by
the manufacturer. The sizes given   e A5 are for energy-limiting class 3, Types B
and   C   devices only.
1-2
in Tabl
'Y   Table A5   Minimum protective conductor size for class 3   Types   B   and C   devices
p   to   and indudin
6   A
*   For other device   types   and ratings or higher fault levels consult manufacturer's
data. See Regulation 4345.2 and The IET Commentary on the 17th Edition of
the Wiring Regulations.
142
Guidance note 3: Inspection   s.   Testing
o   The Institution of Engineering and Technology
.7

v   Ta   ble   A6   Ambient temperature correction factors
Notes:   I
2
The correction factor is given by: {1   +   0.004   (ambient temp   -
20)]/[1 + 0.004 (10   -   20)} where 0.004 is the simplified resistance
coefficient per "C   at   20   °C given by   BS   EN 60228 for both copper
and   aluminum   conductors. (Alternatively the   correction factor is
given by (ambient temp + 230)/(10 + 230)).
The factors are different from those of Table B.2 because Table A6
corrects   from 10   °c   and Table B.2 from 20 °C.
The ambient correction factor of Table AS is applied to the earth fault loop impedances
of Tables   A1   to   A4   if the ambient   temperature   is other than 10 °C.
For example, if the ambient   temperature   is 25   °c   the measured earth fault loop
impedance of a circuit protected by a 32 A   type   B circuit-breaker   to   BS EN 60898
should   not   exceed 1.1 x 1.06   =   1.17   Q.
A2 Appendix   3   of BS   7671
Appx   3   Appendix   3   of BS 7671 takes into account the increase of the conductor resistance with
increase of   temperature   due   to   load   current,   which may be used   to   verify compliance
with the requirements of Regulation 411.4 for TN systems.
41
sat's
The requirements of Regulation   1.4.4 are considered met when the measured value
of fault loop impedance   fies the following equation:
U0   x
Cmin
la
Z5(M)   0.8   x
where:
Zs(m)
Uo
I
a
Cmin
0.8
Note:
is the measured impedance of the earth fault current loop up   to   the most
distant point of the relevant circuit from the origin of the installation (Q)
is the nominal AC runs line voltage   to   Earth (V)
is the   current   in amps (A) causing operation of the protective device
within the time stated in Table   41.1   of BS   7671   or within   5   s according   to
the conditions stated in Regulation 411.3.2.3 (A).
is the minimum   voltage factor   to   take   account   of voltage variations
depending on time and place, change of transformer   taps   and other
considerations.
value 0.95.
is a   temperature   adjustment factor for ambient   temperature   (see A6
above).
For a low voltage supply given in accordance with the ESQCR, Cmin is given the
Guidance note 3: Inspection   a.   Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
143

A3   Methods of adjusting tabulated values of   1,
(See also 2.6.16 'Earth fault loop impedance verification'.)
A circuit is wired in flat twirl and cpc   70   °C thermoplastic (PVC) cable and protected by
a   6   A   type   B circuit-breaker   to   BS EN 60898. When tested   at   an ambient   temperature
below 20 °C, determine the maximum acceptable measured value of Z5 for the circui
Solution:
1
Ztest
=   F   Zs
(max)
7.28   Q
1
1.20
Ztest ( m a x ) =
x 7.28
ax)::   Q
Z
From Table 4I.3(a) of BS 7671, the maximum permitted value of 25   =
From Table BE in Appendix B of this Guidance Note, F   =   1.20
A   more   accurate   value can be obtained if the external earth fault loop impedance,
is known.   In   this case, the following formula may be used:
1
Ztest
S Ze + p(Z5 ' Ze)
Ze,
:cur
1
Ztest   (max):   0.35+§(7.28-0.35)
Ztest (max):   6.   13
Q
Where the test ambient temperature is likely   to   be other than 20 °C, a further
correction can be made   to   convert   the value   to   correspond with the expected ambient
temperature,   using the following formula:
Ztest (max)
: :   Ze
+°F
zs-ze)
where a is given by Table B2 of Appendix B.
In   the example above, assume the test ambient   temperature   is   5   °C.
From Table BQ, a   =   0.94
Thus, the   accurate   reading including temperature compensation
0.94
Ztest   (ma:»:}=   0.35+ 1.20(7.28- 0.35i
Ztest  (max): 5.78   Q
is:
144
Guidance note   3:   Inspection & Testing
®   The Institution of Engineering and Technology
I
I

In   the   previous   example, taking the (RI + Re) reading for the circuit as   0.2   ohm:
z5   for the circuit   at   70   °c
=   Ze+ F(R1+
R2)test
= 0 . 3 5 + 1 . 2 0 ) < 0 . 2
=0.59   Q
The temperature-corrected Z5 figure of   0.59   Q   Is   acceptable,   since   it is less than the
maximum value of 7.28   Q   given   IN   Table   41.3   of BS 7671.
Note:   Where reduced cross-sectional area protective conductors are used, maximum earth
fault loop impedances may need   to   be further reduced   to   ensure disconnection times
are sufficiently short   to   prevent overheating of protective conductors during earth faults.
The requirement of the equation in Regulation 543.18 needs   to   be   met:
where:
S
>
k
I
Zs
t
is the nominal cross-sectional area of the conductor in mm?
means greater than or equal   to
is a factor taking   account   of the resistivity,   temperature   coefficient and
heat capacity of the conductor material, and the appropriate initial and
final   temperatures,   see Tables 54.2-54.4
is the value in amperes (runs for AC) of fault   current   for a fault of negligible
impedance, which can flow through the associated protective device, due
account being taken of the   current   limiting effect of the circuit impedances
and the limiting capability (Pt) of that protective device
is the loop impedance   at   conductor normal operating temperature
is the operating time of the   overcurrent   device in seconds corresponding
to   the fault   current   I   amperes   -   obtained from the graphs in Appendix   3
of BS 7671, as the prospective earth fault   current   I   (= Unix Cmin/Zs) is
known.
Coin is the minimum voltage factor, the meaning of which is explained in Section
A2 of this appendix.
The following example illustrates how   measurements   taken   at   20 °C may be adjusted
to 70 "C values, taking the (Ri + RQ) reading for the circuit into   account.
Note:
The formula above involves taking   measurements   at   20 "C and converting them   to
70 "C values. Alternatively, the 70 "C values can be converted   to   the values at the
expected ambient temperature, for example, 20 °C, when the   measurement   is carried
out.
I
Guidance note 3: Inspection   s.   Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
145

lklng the   same dl*uUit.
Zum
=   Z¢-I-(R1+
R2)u=sc
-0.32+0.2
=0.5S Q
From the formula Ztest(max) = 'éZ§
25   (max)   from BS   7671   =   7.28   Q
zE5,ma,,=
1575
x   7.28 =   6.07   Q
Therefore, as   0.55   Q   less than 6.07   Q,   the circuit is acceptable is
146
Guidance Home 3: Inspection a Testing
C   ThelllslituliondEngillelinglrdledlumlogy

434.51
543.115
To check compliance with Regulation 4i'>-4.5.2 and/or Regulation 543.1.3, i.e.   to   evaluate
the equation
52
1%
kz
it is necessary   to   establish the impedances of the circuit conductors   to   determine the
fault   current,   I, and hence the protective device disconnection time,   t.
Fault current,
U0
ZS
x
Cmin
where:
U0
Cmin
is the nominal voltage   to   Earth,
is the minimum voltage factor to take   account   of voltage variations de-
pending on time and place, changing of transformer taps and other con-
siderations.
Note:   For low voltage supplies given in accordance with the ESQCR, Cmin
given the value   0.95.
is
ZN   is the earth fault loop impedance, and
Z5 =Ze   + RE   + RE
where:
Ze   is that part of the earth fault loop impedance external   to   the installation
R1
R
2
NON' If the distribution board is   not   at   the origin of the installation, Ze is
replaced in the above equation   be   Zdb, that   part   of the earth fault loop
impedance on the supply side of the distribution board.
is the resistance of the line conductor from the origin of the circuit   to   the
point of utilization
is the resistance of the protective conductor from the origin of the circuit
to   the point of utilization.
Similarly, in order   to   design   ircuits for compliance with the limiting values of earth
fault loop impedance given in Tables 41.2   to   41.4 of   BS   7671, it is necessary   to
establish the relevant impedances of the circuit conductors when the line conductor is
at   the appropriate maximum permitted operating temperature, as given in Table 52.1
of BS 7671, and the circuit protective conductor is   at   the appropriate 'assumed initial
temperature', as given in Tables 54.2   to   54.5.
C
147
'Qi
Guidance note 3: Inspection 8= Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology

Table   BI gives values of (Re + R2) per   metro   for   various   combinations of conductors
up to and including   50   mm   cross~sectionaI area. It also gives values of resistance
(niliohms) per metre for ead*l   size   of conductor. These values   are   at   20 'C
V   Tall. II   Values d   resistance/metre for copper dnd aluminum conductors   and   of
(RI +   RQ)   per   metro   at   20   'C in milliohms/meter
148
Gudanne Home 3: Inspection a Testing
c The Institutional Engineering md Tednology

V   Table B2   Ambient temperature   multipliers   (00   to   Table   B1
*   The   correction   factor   is   given   by:   {1   0.004   (ambient   temp   -   20 °C)]
where   0.004   is the simplified resistance coefficient per "C   at   20 °C given by
BS EN 60228 for copper and aluminum conductors.
+
To assist anyone using Table BI, the following   two   formulas may be helpful:
m y / m x L
1000
L:
1000
mf;/m
R   X
For verification purposes the designer will need   to   give the values of the line and
circuit protective conductor resistances   at   the ambient   temperature   expected during
the   tests.   This may be different from the reference   temperature   of   20   °C used for Table
BI.   The correction factors in Table B2 may be applied   to   the Table BI values   to   take
account   of the ambient   temperature   (for test purposes only).
Bl   Standard overcurrent devices
Table 41.2
Table 41.3
Table 41.4
Table   B3   gives the multipliers   to   be applied to the values given in Table Bl for the
purpose of calculating the resistance   at   maximum operating   temperature   of the line
conductors and/or circuit protective conductors in order to determine compliance with
the earth fault loop impedance of Table 41.2,   41.3   or 41.4 of BS   7671.
Guidance note 3: Inspection   8:   Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
149

v   Table   B3   Conductor temperature factor   F   for standard devices
Multipliers   to   be applied to Table B1 for devices in Tables   41.2,   41.3,   41.4
Not incorporated in a cable
and not bunched (notes I, 3)
1.04   1.04   1.04
corporated   in   a   cable   O
Table 54.1   Notes:
I
Table   54.3   2
3
See Table 54.2 of BS 7671. These factors apply when protective conductor
is not incorporated or bunched with cables, or for   separate   bare protective
conductors in contact with cable covering but not bunched with cables.
See   Table   54.3   of BS 7671. These factors apply when the protective conductor
is a core in a cable or is bunched with cables.
The factors are given by F   =   i   + 0.004 {conductor operating   temperature   -
20 °C} where 0.004 is the simplified resistance coefficient per °C   at   20 "C
given in BS EN   60228   for copper and aluminum conductors.
If cable loading is such that the maximum operating   temperature   is   70   °C,
thermoplastic (70 °C) factors are appropriate.
B2   Steel-wire   armour,   steel conduit and steel
trunking
Formulae for the calculation of the resistance and inductive   reactance   values of the
steel-wire   Armour   of cables and of steel conduit, ducting and trunking are published
in Guidance Note 6.
Generally, it is accepted that there is approximately a   10   "C   difference between the
conductor   temperature   and the   outer   sheath   temperature   for a steel-wire armoured
cable   at   full load.
GN1   See also the guidance in the appendices of Guidance Note I   for mineral insulated
copper sheathed cable temperature data.
150
Guidance note 3: Inspection   s.   Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology
4

A
2.5.2 item   0 Access
Accuracy of   test   instruments
Additional protection
Additions and Alterations
4.2
2.5.2 item h, 2.6.19
1.4,   3   Chap 5
B
2.5.2   item g
2.6.4, 2.6.11
Barriers
fire
protection by, during erection
Basic protection
Breaking capacity of devices
2.5.2 item h
Table 2.8, 2.6.11 Chapter   5
Schedule of   test   results
2.5.3 enclosures
British Standards referenced
Degrees of protection
BS EN 60529
Emergency lighting
BS 5266
Fire alarms
BS 5839
Preface, Table 3.2 note 5
Preface, 2.5.3 General item k, 2.5.3
Flexible cables item h,
Table 3.2 note 5
Residual   current   devices
BS 4293, 7288
BS EN 61008, 61009
Table   2.9
2.5.3 Switchgear item a, Table 2.7,
26.17, Table 2.8, Appendix A
Switchgear
BS EN 60947   2.5.2 item j, Table 2.1,
2.5.3 Switchgear item a
151
'Q
Guidance Note 3: Inspection & Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Technology

Index
c
Calibration (checking of accuracy)
Certificate, Electrical Installation
4.2
Client
1.3.1,1.4,1.6,2.1, 2.2, 2.6.2,
2617   3 4   3 8 2   38.4,Chap 5
Introduction, 1.1, 1.3, 1.6, 3.4,
3.6, 3.8,Table 3.3,   3.11,   Chap 5
3.9.1
1.2, 4.9
Colour coding (identification of conductors)
Competence
Condition Report, Electrical Installation
1.3.1,   1 6   2 6 1 7   3 1 ; 3 8   311,
3.12,Chap 5
Introduction, 1.6,   Chap 5 3.4,
Construction (Design and Management)
Regulations 2015
Continuity
main bonding
protective conductors
2.5.1, Chap 5,Table 3.4
2.5.2   items b and h,   2.5.3,   2.6,
Table 3.4, 3110.3, 4.3,
Appendix A
2.6.5, FIS 2.1a
'all-insulated' installations   -
test   method 1
metallic enclosures as protective
conductors
test procedure
ring final circuit conductors, test method
supplementary bonding
2.6.4, 2.6.6,
2.6.5
H821   F%25
2.5.2, 2.6.4, 2.6.5, 2.6.19, 3.9
Table   3.
.1,
4, 2.2
D
Defects
Designer
3.7, 3.11, Chap 5
Introduction, I   .5,   2.1, 2.2, 2.5,   5.4,
Chap   5
Diagrams, presence of   2.5.2   item   p,   3.9.1
E
2.6.4, 26.14, Table 3.4, Hg 2.7
2.6.1-4, 4.6
Appx A
Earth electrode resistance
Earth electrode resistance   testers
Earth fault loop impedance
maximum measured values
temperature correction
test method
testers
Electrical Installation Certificate
Appx A
Chap 2
4.5
1   1; I   I .4,   .Et, 2.1,2.2, 2.6.2,   2.6.17, 3.4,
3.8, Chap 5
Electrical separation
insulation resistance tests
source of supply
2.6.9
152
Guidance   note   3: Inspection   s.   Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology
.5.

Index
2.6.9
2.6.9
inspection
measurement of voltage
Electricity   at   Work Regulations 1989
Preface,   1.1,   I, Table 3.2 note 2, 3.3,
3.4, 5.5, 4.9
2.5.3, 2.6.25 Electromagnetic disturbances
Electricity Safety, Quality and Continuity
Regulations   Table 3.2   note   I
F
Fault protection
Fire barriers, provision of
Forms
Functional extra-low voltage (FELV)
Functional testing   2.6.4,
2.5.2h
2.5.2g
Chap 5
Table 2.2, 2.6.10
2.6.20, Table 3.4, 3.10.3
G
General requirements   Chap   1
H
Introduction, 2.3, 3.4 Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974
Health and Safety Executive Guidance
Note GS 38
Housing (Scotland) Act 2014
1.1, 4.1
1.3.2
2.5.2b Identification by color
Information for inspector
Initial inspection
general procedure
inspection checklist
inspection items
schedule
Initial testing
results, recording of
test   sequence
Initial verification
certificates
frequency of subsequent inspection
information for inspector
purpose of
relevant criteria
scope
typical forms
2.3, 3.6
2.5.1
2.5.3
2.5.2
Chap 5
2.6
2.6.1
2.6.4
Chap 2
2.2, Chap 5
2.4, Table 3.2
2.3
2.1
2.1
2.4
Chap   5
2.
Guidance note 3: Inspection 8: Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
153

Index
Inspection checklist
Inspection Schedule
inspector's   competence
Instruments
Insulation resistance
Insulation resistance testers
2.5.3
Chap   5
1.2, 3.8.1
1.1, Chap   4
2.6.7, 3.10.3b, Table 2.2
4.4
l,K,L
Labellings and marking
Landlord and Tenant Ad 1985
2.5.2m.. p, 3.9.1
1.3.2, Table 3.2 note 10
M
Medical locations
Minor Works Certificate
Model forms
Motor circuits
2.6.22, Table 3.2
2.2, Chap 5
2.2, 2.6.3, Chap 5
3.10.3 item a
N
Non-conducting location
Non-standard colours
Notices
p
(also signs)
2.6.12
2.5.2 item
2.5.2   item   p, 3.9.1
0
2.6.5,
2.6.7, 4.4
2.6.6, 4.3
3.8.1 ,
Introduction
3.12
2.6.23
Ohmmeters
insulation resistance
low-resistance
Older installations, inspection of
Operational manual
Overvoltages due   to   faults
Overvoltages of atmospheric origin or
due   to   switching   2.6.24
P
PELV
2.5.2 item h, Table 2.2, 2.6.4,
2.6.8, Table 2.4, Table 2.5,
2.6.lO, 3.9.1, 4.4
1.3.
3.1,
3.11,
Periodic inspection
general procedure
inspection checklist
purpose of
report
sampling
scope
visual inspection
3.8.4, Tab
3.8.3
3.9.1
3.8.1
1,   5.3
je   3.3
3.8.1
3.8.2
154
Guidance   note   3: Inspection   s.   Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology

Index
hap 5
Ie 3.2
3   3.8.3
Chap I, Table 3.1
3.6
1.2, 3.8.1
3.2
C
3.7, Tab
8.2;
3.1, 3.8.1
3.2,
2.6.4,
1.5
3.8.1
3.5, Table 3.1,Table 3.2
3.10, Table 3.4
2.6.18
4.8
2.6.18
2.6.5, 3.10.3c;, Table 3.4
3, Fig 2.6
2.6.17
2.6.1
Periodic inspection and testing
forms
frequency of
general procedure
general requirements
information for inspector
inspector's competence
necessity for
purpose of
record keeping
requirement for
routine checks
Periodic testing
Phase sequence
instruments
verification of
Polarity
test method
Prospective fault current
Protection by
barriers provided during erection
enclosures provided during erection
2.6.4, 2.6.11
2.6.4, 2.6.11
Q,R
Record keeping
Reference tests
continuity of protective conductors
1.6
2.6.4,   2.6.5, F1g   2.1
Table   3
a,   Fig   2.1   b,
4,   3.10.36
2.6.5
2.6.5
2.6.6, Hg 2.2, Hg 2.3,   Table 3.4
2.6.7,   3. IO.3b, Table 2.2
metallic enclosures as protective
conductors
test   methods   1   and 2
continuity of ring final circuit conductors
insulation
resistance test
resistance of floors and walls
sequence of
Relevant criteria
Rented accommodation
Report, Electrical Installation Condition
Residual   current   devices (RCDS)
2.6.12
2.6.4
2.1
1.3.2
1.3.1,   3.11, Chap 5
Guidance note 3: Inspection & Testing
The Institution of Engineering and Tedmology
155

Index
2.5.2 item h
2.5.2   item p
619; Table 3.4
4.7
ppx   B A
3.5, Table 3.1, Table   3_2
2.6.16
for additional protection
notice
test method
testers
Resistance of conductors
Routine checks
Rule of thumb
earth fault loop impedance
3-phase prospective fault current   2.6.17
s
2.6.
1.3.1, 2.6.2, 5.
1.1,   16, 3.8.2
3.8.4, Table 3.3
5.3 1 ;
Safety during testing
Sampling
Schedule of inspections
Schedule of test results
SELV
1.3.1, 2.6.2, 5.1,   5.3
2.5.1, 2.5.2 item c. 2.5.2 item h,
2.6.4, 2.6.8, Table 2.2, Table 2.4,
26.10, 3.9.1, 4.4
Separation of circuits
2.5.2h
2.6.4
2.6.8
2.6.9
1.1
Notices
Shock hazards
Signs see
Specialised systems
Specification
Surveying, thermographic
2.5.2h
Introduction
4.9
T
1.1, Chap   4
2.5.28   n, 5.9.1
Test instruments
Thermal effects
Thermographic equipment   4.9
U
Utilisation categories, switchgear   2.5.2   item j, Table   2.t
v
Chap 2 Verification, initial
Voltage drop, verification   2.6.4, 2.6.21, 4.5
w,x.y,z
No entries
156
Guidance note 3: Inspection   s.   Testing
©   The Institution of Engineering and Technology
2.

ISBN 978-1-78561-452-1